Al Sobotka, has been driving a Zamboni for the Detroit Res Wings since 1973. // How fast does a Zamboni go? Around 15 mph. Wow You drive that fast? Not too often. The reason is you're trying to do a better job, fill every skate mark. But once in a while you step on it from one end to the other. It makes your hair fly when you hit it, you know? Is there special training required to drive a Zamboni? My training was all done on the job, learning a lot of it by mistakes and from the guys who worked here in the past. I always say I'm still in training. How do you spot rookie drivers? Oh, God, they just look straight ahead They don't observe what's going on around them. I look all the way around the surface to see if I missed a big ice gouge from a skate. Some people go once around the outside and then come up the middle. But I like to go around twice. ice? No, I don't get into that at all. The main concern is the quality of the ice. If it takes an extra minute to do it, that's fine. But if there were a race, I'd win. Does blood clean up pretty easily? Yeah, you got ta dry-shave it first-clean it without water. But if blood gets in the ice grooves, it's hard to get out. Do you ever get asked for your autograph? All the time. Kids, mainly. Mr. Ilitch, our owner, asked me once. In 1995, he had me sign a napkin for him. I was privileged. Be honest: Is the Zamboni a chick magnet? It's a magnet for everybody. Chicks get excited just as much as little kids. Even men get excited by it. Rides are auctioned off for charities and at special events. There have been functions that have gotten $2,000 for a ride. Do the players ever give you props of visiting players say they wish their ice was as good. If you get a compliment like that from Eric Lindros, that's a good one. Guys who skate fast, like Paul Coffey, love our ice. How'd you do in 1999s Zamboni driver of the year competition, in which fans got to vote for their favorite driver? I was runner-up. I got screwed, let's put it that way. But that's not important anymore; it's water down the drain. -Dan Snierson
Died of cancer, paleontologist, biologist, author, Harvard professor and Yankees fan Stephen Jay Gould. Gould, 60, was renowned for his theories of evolution and statistical deviation, which he used to explain: the declining chances of a big leaguer's hitting .400; the improbability of Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak; and why, after being told in 1982 that he had eight months to live due to a rare and incurable form of stomach cancer, he liked his odds. * Of prostate cancer, former major league pitcher Joe Black, 78, the first African-American to win a World Series game. Black broke in with the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1952 and was named Rookie of the Year after going 15-4 primarily as a reliever. Manager Charlie Dressen started Black in Game 1 of the World Series against the Yankees and Black threw a complete game to win 4-2. Black, who refined a pitch we now know as the slider, went 30-12 in six years. Proposed A bill to outlaw use of Native American team names and mascots, in public schools, universities and community colleges to drop nicknames such as Apaches, Braves, Chiefs, Indians and Redskins. California would be the first state to pass such a bill. Forsaken Leather basketballs, in favor of synthetic ones, at all NCAA championships, partly in response to protests from People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. According to PETA, the hide of one cow is needed to make four leather balls. Synthetic balls-which players and coaches prefer for performance reasons -- are already used at most major schools. Ordered To pull up their pant legs, Yankees Jason Giambi, Rondell White and Enrique Wilson, by baseball's head of discipline, Bob Watson. Those players, following fashion, removed the elastic from their pant cuffs so that they drop down to their cleats, obscuring their socks. Watson warned each player that the Yanks would be fined if the player didn't adjust his uniform. Photograph
A RECENT EQUIPMENT REVOLUTION IS BRINGING HIGH-TECH, HIGH-SPEED MANEUVERS TO ICEFISHING // Icefishing has a reputation as a slow-action, slow-to-change sport. And to a certain extent, that reputation is deserved. Dressed in the requisite space-suit garb, icefishermen move more like lunar explorers than Michael Jordan. Then there's the glacial pace of the hand-over-hand retrieve. Even the quarry is gripped by a lethargy that's only intermittently broken by tentative nips at bait-something icefishermen hyperbolically call "strikes." But icefishing's image is undergoing a total overhaul. The last several years have seen a technological surge in every aspect of the sport-from high-speed augers and no-stretch jigging lines, to powerful electronics that put the fish, and your lure, before your eyes. Here's how recent developments have changed the way we fish for winter's predators. NOT LONG AGO, most walleye fishermen were hanging a live minnow from a float, rattle reel or tip-up. But jigging baits have changed all that. Photograph "Are the days of the wooden tip-up numbered? With the technology race in full swing, it live minnow anymore," says Minnesota icefishing guru Dick (the Griz) Grzywinski. "I'll catch a dozen walleyes on a jigging bait for every one I catch on a minnow. Don't use' em-they're not worth the hassle." He's referring, of course, to the timeconsuming chore of manually checking water depth, then positioning bait just above bottom. Which also means that every time you move to a new hole, the depth has to be reset. And because some state laws require anglers to stay within a certain number of feet of their line, that process is a huge drag on mobility. Stick with jigging. Obviously, you'll want to focus your efforts over prime walleye structure, like a sunken island, a distinct point or the inside turn on a breakline. In this capacity, hand-held GPS units are enormous time-savers. Simply punch in your summertime walleye holes, and begin there. You can't just drill one hole and expect to adequately cover the. This presents some obvious logistical-and labor-problems if you use a traditional auger. Which is why super-sharp power augers are becoming so popular. My personal favorite is the Strikemaster Lazer, which is fitted with a unique curved blade that cuts a hole in half the time it takes any other auger I've used. Instead of drilling a hole, checking its depth, then moving on as necessary until you find the desired depth, there are now several hand-held sounders that give depth readings through the ice. The best one I've found is the Polar Vision, which is powerful enough to read through cloudy ice that other units can't penetrate. Or, you might try getting a reading using the transducer of an ordinary depth finder. Just be sure to pour a little water on the ice to provide firm contact with the transducer. If you watch a jigging expert work a piece of walleye structure, you might think he's on a carpet-bombing mission to the bottom." The ice looks like Swiss cheese. But there's a method to his madness. If you're working an 18- to 24-foot break, for example, drill a line of holes along the structure at 18, 20, 22 and 24 feet. This pattern allows you to work your way around the structure at one depth, then jump out to the next series of holes as the fish change their orientation. Walleyes may hold below the deeper holes at midday and then move shallower for the evening bite. This way, your holes are all set to go, and you won't risk spooking the fish off the structure by drilling at sunset. Photograph The quick-strike rig: Stick the leading hook just ahead of the dorsal fin and the trailing hook near the pectoral fin. Photograph Getting used to the circular reading has always been a problem for first-time users of flasher units. Zercom has solved that problem with the introduction of the Vertical Flasher, which, as its name implies, shows action the way it's really happening below you spoons like the Vingla and Swedish Pimple, swimming baits like the Jigging Rapala and vibrating blades like the Cicada and Heddon Sonar. Even plain leadhead jigs tipped with a minnow or minnow head work. My usual choice is a size 3 Swedish Pimple in silver with a green or chartreuse back, tipped with a minnow head (use the entire minnow, and you're liable to get short strikes). The method is straightforward. I use a sensitive 30-inch graphite rod and a small spinning reel spooled with sixpound mono. Simply lower the spoon to the bottom, reel it up 6 to 12 inches and then give it a gentle twitch. Hold the rod tip stationary as the spoon sinks on the twitch-it will flutter out to the side before settling in the original position. Don't jig again until the spoon has completely stopped moving-most strikes come after all movement has ceased. A color flasher like the Vexilar FL-8 helps enormously with jig fishing. A walleye hanging a few feet off to the side of the band or a thin red one. But as the fish moves nearer to the bait, the green band turns red or the width of the red band increases. With a little experience, you'll be able to interpret exactly what's going on beneath youwhether there are any fish, how close they are, which lure actions draw them in and when they're about to strike. Experiment with the force of your twitching and the length of the pauses in between until you find what the walleyes are looking for on a particular day. Twitch anywhere from three to six inches, and wait 10 seconds or so between each bounce. Watch the flasher closely to see how the fish are responding and adjust your action accordingly. Sometimes the best action is no action at all-prop your rod up on a clump of snow and leave it. Just remember that mobility is the name of the game here. If you jig a hole for five minutes and don't see a fish or get a strike, move rather cruise around until they find one hearty meal than chase down a dozen small snacks. Which means that, while you may take an occasional pike by jigging, you're much better off suspending a plump baitfish below a tip-up. The traditional bait is a lively five- to seven-inch sucker, chub or shiner. But pike are often more interested in dead baitfish, particularly oily, smelly ones like smelt or ciscoes. Why the interest in corpses? Not only do pike rely on scent more than any other predator fish when feeding, but it doesn't take a whole lot of energy to catch up to a cadaver. The best way to rig dead bait on a tip-up is on a quick-strike rig using a pair of double or treble hooks. Push one hook into the baitfish near the pectoral fin, the other just in front of the dorsal fin. This arrangement allows you to set the hook much quicker than with a dorsal- or lip-rigged bait. You'll land more fish, and because you, you'll have a better chance of successfully releasing fish you don't want to keep. Use 30-pound-test wire leader and a pair of size 2 to 4 treble hooks if you make your own quick-strike. Of the ready-made tackle, my favorite is the Quickset Rig. The hooks are ultra-sharp and the rear hook slides along the harness to accommodate any size baitfish. Set several baits 6 to 12 inches above the bottom in weedy bays, around the edges of cabbage humps and in shallow backwaters that hold panfish. If you strike out, it doesn't necessarily mean the fish aren't there, it just means they're not at that depth. Pike will sometimes pick up dead bait right off the bottom; at other times, they prefer it hung only a foot under the ice. The only constants are the two characteristics of your bait-stinking and dead. When in Trout WHILE MOST gamefish become sluggish in winter, lake trout get lively under the ice. It's not unusual to get one up powers right back to the bottom. Icefishing for lake trout has become a stick-and-move sport. Time-consuming bait rigs are out, jigging is in. I use a 1/2- to 1-ounce bucktail jig, like the Northland Sting'r Bucktail, in white or chartreuse tipped with a three- to fourinch live shiner, a dead cisco or smelt or a strip of cut bait, such as herring or sucker. If I'm using cut bait or a minnow more than four inches long, I add a stinger hook to account for short strikes. When lakers are suspended off the bottom, a video or liquid-crystal graph is invaluable for keeping track of the fish and your lure. On the whole, looking for lakers is rapidly turning into "virtual fishing." Trout love to chase bait, for example, and you can often tempt a strike by reeling up quickly. On my screen, I've seen the fish follow a bait from the bottom to just a few feet beneath the ice before taking it. Without good was happening. Most flashers don't have the power to reach down the 50 to 200 feet where lakers lurk-a 200 KHZ graph has to have at least 1,000 watts of peak-topeak power. I run a Lowrance LMS 350A graph off a 14-amp motorcycle battery (enough juice to get me through the day). The unit incorporates a GPS, which I use to navigate directly to my fishing spot-usually a structureoriented summertime hotspot. Once there, I switch over to sonar mode. But finding fish doesn't necessarily ensure success. Setting the hook in deep water has always been a problem. If you're fishing in tOO feet of water with mono, for example, you might be contending with almost 20 feet of stretch. The only thing you can do is set the hook and start running away from the hole to get rid of the slack. Or use wire line. But wire fishing is fraught with kinking problems, which sometimes causes unexpected break-offs. The new breed of braided lines, while they have lines, are perfect for deep-water laker fishingthere's no kinking, they're much less visible than wire line and, because they don't stretch, they telegraph bites much better than mono. And when a fish comes calling from 100 feet away, clear reception is the only thing that can ensure a winning connection. // Video enables you to "watch" the action down below. Here, three lakers peel away from the bottom to inspect a rising jig. Photograph Video enables you to "watch" the action down below. Here, three lakers peel away from the bottom to inspect a rising jig. Author Affiliation Minnesotan Dick Stemberg is a former fisheries biologist and an admitted "ice hound." //
FEATURES 50 Deer Hunting Yearbook The stories behind the biggest bucks of 2003, plus poaching busts, trivia. By Will Snyder 62 Fall Bass Secrets Hot tips from top pros put you in the action when the weather cools. By Homer Circle 70 Bear Guide Down Two hunters struggle to survive after their plane crashes off the Alaskan peninsula. By Christopher Batin 76 Early-Season Stands Mapping Out the Rut, Part I: The best places to ambush whitetails in the pre-rut. By Michael Hanback 78 Wise Guys Eight new tricks to learn from bucks who have seen it all. By Michael Hanback 84 Targeting the Gun Vote Politicians are courting the sportsmen's vote, but which candidates can gun owners trust? By John B. Snow 88 Lewis and Clark: Down to the Sea Trail's end in the Pacific Northwest is where adventure begins for sportsmen headed west. By Jim Low On the Cover 50 Special Deer-Hunting Yearbook: 2003's Biggest Bucks! 78 8 Ways to Fool the Wisest Bucks 106 State-by-State Deer Forecast 76 Top Stand Setups for Pre-Rut Whitetails DEPARTMENTS 8 Editor's Journal Your Mind Cougar comebacks; busting poachers; dumping on the Dems; gun review suggestion 26 Ask the Experts How to find all the pellets in birds; 6mm for varmints 28 Shooting A fool-proof, one-shot method for sighting-in By Jim Carmichel 32 Fishing Additions to lures increase action... and bites By Jerry Gibbs 36 Hunting How to make hunting pressure work in your favor By Jim Zumbo 40 Hunting Dogs Train your pointer to flush on command By Larry Mueller 43 Whitetails Four places sure to funnel bucks By Michael Hanback 44 Bowhunting Twenty-one days in the tracks of a record-book bull elk By Todd Kuhn 48 This Happened To Me! Man vs. bear in a footrace to safety 112 Do-It-Yourself Portable tent platform By Joseph Truini 116 Survival Basic tips for GPS navigation By Rich Johnson 128 Last Laugh Lewis and Clark according to Pat By Patrick F. McManus SNAP SHOTS 17 World's Priciest Shotgunning How to shoot a fortune down the barrel of a 12-gauge 18 Cougar on the Move Radio-collared cougar travels nearly 700 miles across four state lines 20 Better easier to catch than Northern and Florida strains 25 Thrill Killers Trigger-happy poachers are killing big game just for the "fun" of it SPORTING GEAR 94 Muzzleloader Match-Up Three new in-lines compete for top gun in OL's field test By Ralph Lermayer 96 2004's Deer Gear Hi-Beam headlamp, rattle bag, synthetic base layers, more By Frank Miniter and Michael Hanback 100 Gun Test Winchester Model 1885 Low-wall By Jim Carmichel DEER FORECAST: EAST Adventure Discovering smallmouth Heaven State-by-State Deer Forecast: Thriving deer populations promise a good season this fall Scouting Report Finding the remote areas Clear-cuts for bruiser bucks, woodcock and grouse DEER FORECAST: MIDWEST Adventure Wading for king salmon after dark State-by-State Deer Forecast: Shooting more does is part of the Midwest QDM plan Scouting Report First dove season for Minnesotans Early-season whitetails DEER FORECAST: SOUTH Adventure: Scaling cliffs for trophy trout State-by-State Deer Forecast: Shooting more does is part of the Southern QDM plan Scouting Report Study results on the best (and worst) Southern states in which to be a deer grouse State-by-State Deer Forecast: A decent season is expected, despite drought conditions Scouting Report Hunting drought conditions Big Wyoming elk Best river fishing Illustration
WHY IS IT THAT A GREAT many boats supposedly built for fishing come from the factory with rod racks that are incredibly deficient? Some are so bad they are more likely to ensure rod damage than promote rod safety. To add insult to injury, very few of these racks hold enough rods to satisfy today's more advanced light-tackle anglers. And considering the rapidly growing popularity of fly fishing in both freshwater and saltwater, the number of rod racks that can not handle anything much over 7 feet in length never ceases to amaze me. The skiff I own today has super rod racks, primarily because over twenty years ago several of us were able to convince the owner of that small boat company that a good horizontal under-the-gunwale rod-holding system had many advantages. I've also helped build up or modify quite a few other boats over the years -- two of them for my own use -- with do-it-yourself rod racks that really worked. Bigger boats can use a combination of storage schemes: horizontally under the gunwales, vertically along the sides of a console, along Some of the really good designs on the market even have horizontal rod storage inside lockers (e.g. the recessed foredeck of an open fishing boat). As far as I'm concerned, angled rodholders in the gunwales are fine for fishing applications such as trolling or live baiting, but poor for long runs at high speeds or trailering on the road. I once had a rod carelessly left in a gunwale angled holder disappear over the side of the boat during a relatively short but fast run in a moderately choppy sea; I never missed the rod until I arrived at my next stop. On several occasions I've seen rods bounce out of identical gunwale holders on trailered boats if the road happened to be a little bumpy. Even if recovered, the rods are usually damaged and the reels don't work very well anymore. Horizontal rod racks are feasible on all but the very smallest of boats. Admittedly, it isn't very practical to stow a 9-foot fly rod horizontally under the gunwale of a 10-foot won't be able to carry six rods per side in a boat that small -- not even ultralight 5-foot spinning rigs. But I can easily get eight casting/fly rods per side in my 16-foot skiff, and even a 14-footer two of us built up almost a decade ago could carry four to six rods per side. Assuming your boat already has sufficient gunwale overhang inside the cockpit to help protect the rods stowed thereunder, adding suitable racks is essentially a matter of installing two vertical supports per side. Extra-long rods like fly rods or casting sticks over 7-1/2 feet, however, will often require some additional support. If you don't have inside gunwale overhang but would like to add that too, there's a relatively easy way to do so. The rod racks can be made of wood, which isn't expensive, and you can easily cut it yourself. Plastic is another option, but this is much more costly, and in most cases you must have someone familiar with the procedures do the cutting I'd suggest it as the most practical choice -- at least for your first effort. The easiest way to get the right fit for under-gunwale rod supports is to first make templates out of cardboard. The supports should be no more than 48 inches apart; otherwise short rods will flex up and down severely when the going gets bumpy. There must also be enough space between the aft support and the transom or any other bulkhead for the rod handles. All rods except fly rods are best supported immediately below the reels. As for the tips, if there is excessive curvature where the longer rods makes contact with the hull, you might want to add the protection of PVC tubing. The heavy walled variety isn't needed, and in fact is more difficult to work with, so use the lightest you can buy. The tubing can be supported in any way that's suitable for your boat, since it won't have to carry any weight. The tubing must be long enough so that the far end, or you're likely to damage some line guides. And, if you wish, you can easily flare the rear end of the PVC by dipping it in boiling water for a minute or so, then expanding it with anything large enough to get the job done -- a soft drink bottle, for instance. Unless there's so much curvature in the hull that the tubing can not be made to conform by hand, you won't have to heat it to bend it. But if you do, the easiest way is to plug one end and fill it full of boiling water. Pour the water out after a minute or so, and then quickly push the tubing against the curvature of the hull so that it fits. Hold the tubing there until it cools sufficiently to retain the desired shape. Obviously, it is prudent to wear thick gloves or use potholders while engaged in this maneuver. The rod supports can be anchored from the top in a variety of ways, and/or. They can also be fiberglassed to the inner hull or inner sides of a fiberglass hull. Top support, along with a flexible adhesive (like 3M 5200) used to anchor the supports to the side of the boat, is the method I've obtained the most satisfactory results with. If you don't want to drill down through the gunwales to attach the supports, you can use sturdy aluminum angle stock to do the same from the underside. Both methods have worked well for me. If you find it desirable to add gunwale overhang inside the boat, you might want to use the rod racks as vertical supports. This usually isn't necessary, however, so whether or not the racks themselves actually touch the cockpit floor isn't important. On some of the smaller round-chine aluminum skiffs I've modified, it wasn't even practical. Adding gunwale overhang isn't difficult, and can be done even with aluminum utility boats that have just a small boxed or circular gunwale, as shown in is a few pieces of clear (knot free) 1x2-inch lumber, and maybe some 3/8-inch to 1/2-inch exterior or marine grade plywood in you want the results even wider. For sections where the hull curvature is too much for the 1x2 to bend without the risk of breaking, make relief cuts 2 inches apart, halfway through the wood. The last time I widened a gunwale this way, it was still as stiff and strong as ever many years later., long after the hull was completely worn out. The wider, stiffer gunwales also considerably reduced the tinny sound of the aluminum hull. To keep the rods in place in the racks, the horizontal U-shaped cuts should be angled downward around 30 degrees. A short piece of elastic shock cord (bungee) for each separate rack will prevent the rods from bouncing out on choppy days. Since the cord will need to be replaced every year or two, I drilled a hole through the top of my rack, then added a small flathead stainless steel a base large enough for the bungee to slip through fits over the screwhead. Just knot one end of the bungee, slip it through the hole in the top of the rack and then through the base of the electrical connector, and tie another overhand on that end. For a worthwhile finishing touch, line the U-shaped cutouts with cork sheeting or thin indoor carpet, which will protect the finish on the rods. Contact cement will keep the lining in place.
They combine most of the virtues of a scope with light weight and small size. Why aren't they more popular? Read on and find out. // IT'S STRANGE BUT IT'S TRUE. America is the world's leader in technology and scientific innovation, but American shooters are as hidebound and stodgy a lot as you'll find. It took decades for the average hunter to discover the advantages of telescopic rifle sights, and now the same slow process is going on with electronic sights. More's the shame, because they can do some things better than any scope or iron sight. The typical electronic sight is less expensive than a telescopic sight of comparable quality. Its small size makes it less cumbersome than a regular scope and that, along with its lighter weight, has less effect on the handling and feel of a firearm. Then there is eye relief: Where the eye relief of all rifle and handgun scopes is quite limited, it is virtually unlimited in the electric sight. You can see the dot and the target whether your you've ever been pounded in the eyebrow by the ocular-lens bell of a scope, this will mean a great deal to you. FASTER THAN FAST Electronic sights are far easier for the beginning shooter to master than scopes or open sights. You simply plaster the big red dot where you want the bullet to go and squeeze the trigger. And finally, far-sighted shooters with eyes that absolutely refuse to focus on the front sight of a firearm will find the electronic sight to be a godsend since it doesn't require the use of corrective-lens eyeglasses. And there's more. The relatively narrow tube of a telescopic sight restricts the shooter's field of view, but an electronic sight, properly used, has an unlimited field. You don't look into it as you do a scope. You simply keep both eyes focused on the target and squeeze the trigger as the red dot settles where the bullet is supposed to go. And since most electronic sights are free of parallax, you'll still hit the of the tube. Photograph For eyes that can no longer focus on the front sight of a handgun, a red-dot is the answer to a prayer, since it puts sight and target in the same optical plane. // All of this makes the electronic sight quicker than quick to use. Out to 25 yards or so, an experienced handgun shooter can centerpunch his target in well under a second, and that includes the time it takes him to react to the buzzer of an electronic timer, raise his gun, aim, and pull the trigger. WHERE THEY SHINE With the exception of Aimpoint's 5000-2X model, electronic sights don't magnify, so they're best for shooting at targets no farther than 100 yards or so. This makes them ideal for close-range plinking, casual target shooting, and small-game hunting with .22 rimfire rifles and handguns. The electronic sight is an excellent choice for use on shortrange woods rifles such as the Winchester 94, Marlin 336, and Ruger 96/44. Same goes for Casull. In states and hunting areas where their use is not prohibited, electronic sights also work great on in-line muzzleloaders. Shotgunners of an experimental nature occasionally give red-dot sights a try at skeet, Sporting Clays, and wingshooting, but they haven't really caught on, and I'll be surprised if they ever do, because they're designed for aiming, not for pointing. However, you who hunt big game with shotguns and slug loads will find the red-dot sight to be just the ticket for bringing home the venison. But it's on a turkey gun that the red-dot sight really shines. Anyone who has patterned a few shotguns knows that it's not uncommon to see a shotgun throw the main part of its charge somewhere other than where you're aiming. But an electric sight enables you to zero your shotgun just as you would a rifle, and once that's done the gun will throw the center off its pattern precisely where the red dot shines. BATTERY ANXIETY I'd guess that they depend on batteries. They visualize themselves aiming at the trophy of a lifetime and, without warning, the red dot suddenly shuts off. Won't happen. For one thing, battery life for most sights is far longer than most hunts, even if the dot is allowed to burn 24 hours per day for the entire hunt. And besides, the dot doesn't suddenly switch off as the battery grows weak. It grows noticeably dimmer, which is your cue to put in a fresh battery, which you had the foresight to keep in your daypack. Most electric sights are rated as water-resistant, with very few rated as waterproof. Even so, I've hunted in Alaska with a water-resistant sight when it rained all the time, and it came through with flying colors. All I did was keep it covered with my raincoat. Mounting an electric sight is no more trouble than mounting a scope. You have to be able to read the directions and use a screwdriver. Bear in mind and bases that will not let the sight slip, and that some rings and bases are stronger than others. I suggest that when you purchase your mounting system, you get it from a dealer who's had experience with serious handguns. To paraphrase the old adver rising slogan, red dots mean sure shots. Give one a try.
. See also cover story of same issue A deer track tells a story. It can begin where a buck crosses a logging road in the Big Maine Woods, or where one rises from his bed in the Rockies -- anywhere Novembers are white, anywhere deer have wild country to roam and hunters have the freedom to follow. It is a tale that unfolds mile after mile, building suspense in a way that few other hunting methods can match, and it doesn't end until you leave the track in defeat or raise your rifle in a moment of glory. For all the opportunities that tracking offers, true aficionados are rare. A core of plaid-jacketed disciples in the northeastern states have drawn attention to the method with pachyderm-size bucks, but most rank and file hunters continue to think of whitetails as being too alert to track close enough for a shot. Consequently, popular hunting tactics are predicated on the notion that it's much wiser to let the deer come to you, rather than the other way around. But if you have the determination to as it takes, then you're already halfway to shooting the animal standing at the end of it. I CHECK THE CONDITIONS Unless you possess a canine nose or a lifetime of experience, you need snow to have a chance at this game. Half a foot of overnight snowfall that stops with the dawn is about perfect, guaranteeing that any tracks you cross will be fresh and the snow underfoot will be silent. Gently falling snow is better yet, because precipitation drives scent to the ground, eliminating one sense from the deer's arsenal of defenses. If conditions are poor, don't become discouraged. A rutting buck will be able to hear you crunching over old snow but may be more concerned with sex than danger. You may get a shot when a deer becomes curious about what is following and investigates. Or you may have your chance when a buck and a doe that are traveling together separate when you disturb them, and the buck swings back to look for her. Maine hunter Dick that walking whitetails generally stop on odd-numbered steps -- three, five, seven, and so on an irregular cadence he tries to duplicate when tracking over crunchy snow, hoping to trick deer into thinking that the intruder has four legs instead of two. II CUT A TRACK Along the northern tiers of Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine, as well as in parts of the upper Midwest and the foothills of the Rockies where I hunt whitetails, the most efficient way to find fresh tracks is to cruise logging roads. Because relatively few deer inhabit these remote environs (in many places, deer density is four to six animals per square mile) and road assistance is even scarcer, a four-wheel-drive with a good spare and a front-end winch, plus a chain saw for cutting downed trees from your route, can be as crucial to the success of a hunting trip as your rifle. You may easily cover many miles before finding a big track that's fresh enough to follow. Alternatively, you can walk of bucks that are looking for does or on the way from their feeding grounds to bedding areas. III READ THE SIGN Telling the difference between the track of an average buck and a doe can be difficult, but the track of a really big buck -- one that you can stick your fist into -- is about as much like the dainty imprint of a doe as a bobcat's is like one made by a Siamese. Big bucks walk flat-footed and are more likely to show the indentations of their dewclaws. They also give the impression of a widely spaced, staggered stride, with outward pointing toes, whereas does leave a narrow trail of perfect hearts that point to where they're going. Then, too, the farther you follow the hoofprints, the more likely you are to see where a buck's rack has knocked the snow from brush or where he dribbled a little urine as he walked, something that a doe, which squats to pee neatly between her rear hooves, never does. bed that shows dark stains under the body from the buck's tarsal glands. Far more difficult than assigning gender is assessing how long ago the sign was made. There's no substitute for experience; you're going to follow a lot of long-gone bucks before you begin to understand how wind, temperature, and changes in the crystal structure of snow combine to alter a track's appearance over time. Bernier says that the best way to learn is by tracking your dog. Take him out in the snow, then repeat the process at two-hour intervals and note how the appearance, texture, and color of his fresh tracks differ from the older ones. Do this under varying snow conditions throughout the winter. Then, when hunting season rolls around, note how your own tracks change by comparing your boot prints from dawn side by side with your boot prints made at noon or in the evening. IV STAY ON THE TRAIL Okay, you've found the track of a big deer that your homework tells -- check your compass and go. The most common mistake trackers make is following too slowly. During the rut, bucks travel widely in search of does that have come into estrus. If you mosey along, stalking each piece of cover with a step and pause, you're never going to catch up. As a rule of thumb, match your pace to the deer's. A walking deer leaves tracks about 18 inches apart; a trotting buck, 3 to 4 feet. The second error hunters make is tracking with their heads to the ground. You aren't going to see any deer down there. Glance at the tracks briefly, noting their course for 5 or 10 feet (farther in open country), then pick up the slack by walking with your rifle at the ready and your eyes sweeping back and forth. Don't tread directly on the track in case you lose it and need to go back -- and you will lose the track, even in the best snow conditions with a lot of other deer. Other times he may backtrack and then jump off to the side, a defensive maneuver to confuse carnivores that hunt by scent. When you lose a track, make a swing to one side and circle out in front. No luck? Make a bigger swing. Bucks often walk with the wind at their backs. You can try to keep the wind in your favor by leaving the track and circling ahead, but unless the country is relatively open or you know where that buck is likely to bed down, you're just wasting time. Stay on the trail. You'd be surprised at how many big bucks are tracked down and shot with the wind at the hunter's back. Next to aging tracks, the most difficult aspect of this discipline is knowing when the deer is close at hand, dictating that you slow the pace. Often deer will begin to meander and browse a little before bedding down, leaving signs that may not be obvious to the cover, slow down and look hard. Above all, never give up. I once jumped a buck three times in as many hours before finally getting a clear shot. If I'd turned around the first time I made a mistake, I never would have given him the opportunity to make one later. V MAKE THE SHOT -- QUICKLY In deer tracking you don't count antler tines. You don't try to maneuver for a better shot. If you do, you don't shoot the buck. The vast majority of whitetails will be aware of your presence before you are aware of theirs. They may pause for three or four seconds to look at you, or they may be out of the gate and running before you shoulder your rifle. Offhand shots are the rule, and you take follow-up shots as offered. Bernier prefers a pump-action rifle with a peep sight, a combination touted by many trackers as superior for rapid, accurate shooting. A low-power scope is arguably as fast and Whatever gun you carry, practice with it until it becomes an unconscious extension of your arm. Larry Benoit, the famous Vermont deer tracker, has often said, "The hardest part is finding a big buck. The easiest part is getting them out." True enough, but words of encouragement won't help much when you start at one end of a drag rope that's looped around the antlers of a 200-pound-plus animal. Just keep in mind that all the miles you've traveled to get yourself into this predicament were worth it. You've joined the brotherhood of those few who can call themselves deer trackers and acquired a trophy that stands as testament to your woodsmanship, physical endurance, and courage -- the very attributes of the great game animal that lies at your feet. DO YOU KNOW YOUR TRACKS? -- FRESH: Check the edges of a track left in powdery snow with your finger. Fresh tracks give to the touch. Disturbed particles of snow will give a fresh track a feathered the weather has changed. -- 2 HOURS OLD: In powdery snow the edges and midline ridge will set and become firm to the touch within an hour or two. A great way to tell if a print is fresh is to briefly place your bare hand down alongside it and compare the two, because your skin transmits heat to the snow at about the same rate as the deer's hoof. -- TOO OLD: A track not worth following will look distorted and can fill with snow or debris. Under the right snow conditions, an old track can appear fresh in the shade. Check the trail in an open, sunlit spot, where the tracks will show distortion from melting. -- HOW BIG? A fully mature buck (3 1/2 years old or older) will leave a track measuring 5 to 6 inches from toe tip to the back of the dewclaw (hoof length from 3 to 3 1/4 inches). Adult does and immature bucks seldom leave a track more than 4 inches in length can lay a .30/06 cartridge crosswise inside the hoofprint or dewclaw spread, the deer that left it is fit for the wall. -- WHICH DEER? When you pick up the thread of a deer's path where it leaves the confusion of other tracks, you may find that you're following another deer. No two bucks walk exactly the same, and usually one toe will be longer or shaped differently than the other, or a chip in the hoof will make the track distinctive. Learn to recognize the characteristics of the buck you're after so you won't waste time. -- IS HE CLOSE? According to tracking expert Dick Bernier, a reliable indicator that a deer is nearby is a J-hook in the trail. "That means the buck is about to lie down. Generally, I'll drop right to my knees and start looking under tree limbs. If there's any incline, that buck will probably bed on the uphill side. You have to be ready." -- BUCK OR track from a doe track. One clue you can consider is the trail's pattern: The rear hooves of all deer tend to overlap the front hooves. But due to differences in pelvic structure, the rear tracks of a buck often land slightly inside the front hoofprints and sometimes fall a little short of them. A doe places her hind hooves on top of the front track and slightly outside of them. The toes of a heavy buck may splay out a little to each side, giving the impression of a widely spaced, staggered stride, whereas a doe's neat tracks point to where she is heading. A heavy buck is also more likely to leave the impression of his dewclaws. -- OTHER SIGN: Don't confine your observations only to tracks. Cold will quickly freeze lances of urine and pellets. If yellow snow gives to the touch and the pellets are soft with a shiny look, there's a good chance the deer isn't too far down the trail. Bucks leave larger droppings whereas a doe hunches back and urinates in a slight spray pattern straight between her rear hooves. For information on Dick Bernier's books and deer tracking school (which offers both one-day and weekend courses) contact Big Whitetail Consultants, Dept. FS, 77 White Bridges Rd., Standish, ME 04084; 207-892-3682; www.bigwhitetails.com. Illustration
On the face of it, Lenora B. Fulani, a 42-year-old African American woman who's running for president, should be the progressive woman's dream candidate. Running on a platform that calls for economic democracy, national health care, women's rights, reproductive freedom, and gay rights, she's articulate, telegenic, and media savvy. But for many, the dream turns into a nightmare when they learn she's a candidate and chair of the New Alliance Party (NAP), based in New York City. Cofounded by self-styled psychologist Fred Newman, NAP had ties in the early 1970s to the right-wing fanatic Lyndon LaRouche and a number of other conservative groups. NAP has allegedly broken with LaRouche, but the controversy remains. Is NAP really a progressive group, as it claims? Although NAP describes itself as a "black-led, women-led, multiracial, pro-gay, independent political organization," you'd be hard-pressed to find any progressive organization -- gay, straight, black, white, whatever -- that will align with NAP. Lenora Fulani, working-class family from Chester, Pennsylvania. Fulani was the first member of her family to attend college -- which she likens to "going to Hollywood, it was such a major step" -- and eventually earned her doctorate in psychology from the City University of New York. "There was a lot of devastation, poverty, pain, and craziness in my family," says Fulani. "I was looking for a psychology that had some relevance to the black community and to poor people, and I just hated Freud." In the late 1970s, a colleague at Rockefeller University took her to hear Fred Newman. What she found was Newman's social therapy, which promotes the belief that external social/political conditions are largely responsible for individual psychological problems. These problems are resolved through a combination of "social therapy" and "self-empowering work", sometimes in one of NAP's political organizations. It is this philosophy, linking "therapy" with "politics," that leads critics to call NAP a no exact membership figures, NAP, with chapters in 30 states, claims to be the fourth-largest political party in the U.S., after the Democrats, the Republicans, and the Libertarians. And Fulani has been its main candidate and spokeswoman. Since she joined the New Alliance Party in the early 1980s, Fulani has been running for office. She campaigned first for lieutenant governor of New York state in 1982, then for governor, New York City mayor, and president of the United States in 1988. That year, Fulani became the only female candidate on the ballot in all 50 states, winning over 200,000 votes -- no small feat for a woman running as an Independent. This year, Fulani raised enough funds to qualify for $1,150,000 in federal matching funds. NAP and Fulani say that they raised the money through a network of 200 volunteers (many of them allegedly therapy patients) who collected 40,000 contributions door-to-door, mostly in New York City and California. But NAP, critics say, misrepresents itself and disrupting, and making money off existing organizations. "They talk about democracy, fighting sexism and racism, but their style across the country has been to disrupt community-based groups that are fighting on these issues," says Chip Berlet, an analyst at Political Research Associates in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the author of Clouds Blur the Rainbow, a study of NAP. "They are willing to let the end justify the means. Are they a sinister force of the right or of the government? I don't see that here. This is a group on the left that has gone bad." For instance, Berlet cites the 1984 presidential campaign, when Jesse Jackson, head of the Rainbow Coalition, first ran for president. Simultaneously, NAP formed the Rainbow Lobby, which raised money for international projects. Jackson was forced to publicly disavow any connection with NAP or the lobby. Other groups have their own stories. NAP tried to overrun groups -- such as the New Jewish Agenda, Peace and by staging mass walkouts of their meetings, forming new groups with similar names and acronyms, and scheduling meetings at the same time. NAP also gets low grades from activists in New York City. Although NAP claims to sponsor literacy projects and cultural activities, critics say the party's presence in the city's African American community is nothing more than blue smoke and mirrors. Jitu Weusi, a longtime political activist in Brooklyn and chair of African-Americans United for Political Power, a citywide organization, worked with NAP in the late 1970s and early 1980s, particularly around efforts to remove New York City Mayor Edward Koch from office. But Weusi broke with NAP over what he calls its "chicanery." Weusi says, "NAP tried to co-opt the dump Koch movement. They tried to say they were the crusade. They tried to exclude all of the other groups that were a part of that movement." In this year's presidential election, NAP has made itself felt through guerrilla tactics. Kate McGovern, New Hampshire Citizen Action, had a run-in with Fulani and NAP during the 1992 New Hampshire primary campaign. Fulani disrupted a Democratic presidential candidates forum on health care, cosponsored by McGovern's group. Fulani, sitting in the audience, shouted the candidates down, criticizing the forum as too narrow because only the established candidates were invited to speak. But McGovern disagrees. She says NAP was allowed to attend in limited numbers -- 20 people -- just like any other group. NAP, however, snuck about 50 very vocal members into the meeting, McGovern says. "There is no way that number of supporters would have been admitted to the forum -- had they clearly identified themselves," McGovern says. "I think 'used' and 'duped' characterize my feelings. You want to believe you can trust people who present themselves as progressives, but I find it difficult to believe that Fulani's interested in opposing the right wing in a serious way." Despite such criticism, NAP and Fulani in 1989, U.S. lesbian and gay groups banded together to ask the International Lesbian and Gay Association to reject the New Alliance Party's bid for membership. In a letter, U.S. groups criticized what they called NAP's anti-AIDS policy, its homophobia, and Fulani's takeover of gay rallies in San Francisco and San Diego for campaign speeches. Fulani dismisses such criticism; she sees a sinister alliance between the Democratic party and "Social Democrats who play the role in their community as progressives, but their real role is to make sure that nothing outside the Democratic party develops." I make a distinction between the community and the so-called left forces or the black liberal community, the leadership, because I think it's a very important difference," she responds when asked about the negative reputation NAP has among African American leadership. Fulani insists that "ordinary people, the rank and file", support NAP. "NAP is teaching black people about alternatives to the Democratic party, and the importance of building she says. "I think the black male establishment in this country has been really co-opted. They're covering for their friends in the Democratic party at the expense of black people." But Weusi points out that in New York's 1990 governor's race, of the nine parties that ran candidates, NAP challenged only the two black groups. This time around, Fulani attempted to have Democratic hopeful Paul Tsongas thrown off the presidential ballot in the New York April 7 primary, charging that he lacked the 10,000 signatures required. So is NAP for real? "I don't doubt the sincerity of these people in terms of their dream, but their structure and style is in contradiction to that dream," says critic Berlet. But NAP's success, Berlet says, demonstrates the alienation and ineffectiveness of much of the leftist movement. "Overwhelmingly, the progressive social change movement in this country has abandoned the people NAP seeks to organize. That's a real criticism of the left." Jill.
Janese Swanson and her eightyear-old daughter, Jackie, were watching television during the summer of 1995 when they saw the first ad for a voice-recording toy that they had invented together. They had licensed the product to a toy manufacturer that was now trying to whip up some excitement for the item. On television, a boy held the toy in his hand while a younger girl asked repeatedly for a chance to play with it. He never even looked at her. After 30 seconds, the girl gave up and walked away. Jackie turned to her mother and asked, "Why do they always make the cool toys as if they're for boys?" forgetting, in her distress, that she had helped create the toy. She had certainly thought of it as something for herself as well as for any of the boys she knew. Swanson knew from her own testing of the product that both girls and boys enjoyed playing with it. But she had licensed it to a company that had its own marketing and advertising strategy. Swanson realized that simply change the preconceptions of toy company executives, retailers, or even parents who still believe that microchips are masculine. She would have to create new images of girls enjoying high-tech activities and new toys for them to do it with. Her existing company, Kid One for Fun, Inc., already had an established identity. Rather than yank it in a new direction, she decided to start a new business, and approach potential investors with a plan and mission. The result is Girl Tech. Kid One for Fun still exists on paper. But Girl Tech is where the action is. The new company employs five full-timers who work together closely-brainstorming concepts for girl-friendly high-tech toys-in a small, sunny suite of offices in downtown San Rafael, California. The core creative team, including the designer and writers, is all-female, all in their twenties and thirties. And Swanson's now-nine-yearold daughter still contributes ideas and tests prototypes. The company's goal is to invent technology-based products that are "cool," easy to six and twelve. The easy part has been dreaming up the gadgets. The hard part has been convincing a toy company that girls will buy products that are not pink and fluffy. What do girls want from technological toys? Lots of businessPeople say they would love to know. Only a small number of welldesigned studies have looked into girls' reactions to high-tech toys and games. The Electronic Games for Education in Math and Science (E-GEMS), a research group at the University of British Columbia, has conducted some of the best studies. During the summer of 1993, E-GEMS members timed and interviewed children playing with video and computer games at Science World British Columbia, a Vancouver science center. They concluded that girls enjoyed electronic games, particularly if they could easily get a turn, if other children or adults kept them company while they played, and if the games included strong story lines and welldeveloped characters. Those results were consistent with Swanson's own research on children and high-tech games (she has play preferences and technology). After reviewing all the research in the field, Swanson came to believe that although girls' and boys' tastes are similar, girls are more likely to play cooperatively and to enjoy a game that has few rules and many ways to win. They are also more likely to dislike seeing characters die during the game. At the same time, Swanson knew that some girls found it difficult to join what they perceived to be the macho culture of video games. In her own review of the research, she had seen that children tend to get approval from their peers when they play in ways that are considered "appropriate" for their sex. When they play in what are considered "cross-sexed" activities they are often criticized or left to play alone. Several big companies that have pondered these research results and done their own studies seem to feel that girlfriendly products are a major challenge. For example, beginning in 1993, Sega of America spent more than $200,000 researching possible titles, Sega gave up, at least temporarily, says Roberta Jacobs, a former general manager for Sega of America, now senior vice president at Viacom New Media. Management couldn't see any prospect of a short-term return, says Jacobs. Meanwhile, most of the currently available high-tech games for girls resort to stereotypes. Her Interactive, a division of American Laser Games, released "McKenzie & Co." in 1995, in which girls shop for name-brand clothes in a mall, experiment with makeup, and flirt with boys. Mattel Media's new line of Barbie CDROMs are just as bad: girls print out Barbie stationery or fabric outfits for their own Barbie dolls. At least one other company besides Girl Tech hopes to move beyond those cliches. But Girl Games, Inc., has so far produced only "Let's Talk About ME!" which lets girls learn about health and personality types, make online pen pals, and read their horoscopes. Swanson, 39, has the knowledge and experience she was more technology-minded than girls are "supposed" to be. "I bought appliances for my mom so I could disassemble them," she says. She took apart light switches, the family toaster, blender, and tape recorder so she could figure out what made them work. By the time she entered the workforce years later, it was easy to familiarize herself with computers and their workings. From the very beginning, she developed an impressive record of inventing high-tech fun for all kids. At Broderbund Software, she was product manager for award-winning, highly successful computer games, including "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?," "Treehouse," and "The Playroom." "Carmen Sandiego," in which children learn geography as they chase a clever thief, not only earned large profits for Broderbund and led to live-action and animated television spin-offs, but was also one of the few early computer games to appeal to both girls and boys. After leaving Broderbund, Swanson founded toys. As at Broderbund, Swanson's aim was to dream up gender-neutral toys. One of them was the Yak Bak, a palm-sized voice recorder that lets kids distort their voices by changing the playback speed. So far, it has generated over $50 million in retail sales for the manufacturer, YES! Entertainment, says Swanson. But even with her own company, Swanson saw again and again that once a manufacturer bought a product, its gender-neutral orientation was dropped in favor of presenting "boy toys." Toy company executives regularly asked her to turn her toys and games into ones that appealed mainly to boys. One voicerecording product that she developed hung like a medallion around a child's neck. In tests, every single girl who tried it wanted one. Most boys liked it, too, but a few said they wouldn't want to wear it. Swanson was pleased by the kids' enthusiasm. The toy company wasn't. Executives insisted that the toy be redesigned so it would shoot in order to send messages. Swanson did what the manufacturer wanted, although wasn't happy that the company thought it was important for the toy to appeal to boys rather than to girls. There have been many other instances in Swanson's career when executives chose to shoot video spots that left girls out or insulted them. According to Swanson, one company created a video to persuade its marketing staff that a walkie-talkie toy could be a hot seller. The video was set in a high school and overwhelmingly showed boys using the product. One of the few girls allowed to speak, at the end, managed to say only that the product was a good way to talk to your boyfriend. Swanson has decided to tackle these anti-girl attitudes head-on with Girl Tech. She says she won't capitulate again to old-tashioned industry attitudes. Instead, she's determined to have a contractual provision in all her licensing arrangements that will give her a greater role in the marketing and advertising of her products. So Hasbro, Inc., has stepped up to the challenge. This fall, Hasbro executives signed a contract with Girl Tech, adding Swanson's line of products to such popular games as Scrabble and Monopoly. Hasbro has agreed to market the products in a way that won't insult girls' intelligence. "We are thrilled," says Linda Halunen, Girl Tech's sales manager. "We're bringing out a line of techie gadgets for girls that are so new and mysterious we can't even talk about it." The line, to be marketed under the Girl Tech brand name, is due out early this year. Until then no one is talking about the toys or the company's marketing strategy for fear that copycat manufacturers will jump in and release "me too" products. What sort of packaging and advertising Hasbro uses to launch the toys is crucial not only for sales, but for Girl Tech's broader mission: to change people's attitudes about technology and girls, and to foster have strengthened her conviction that children's social surroundings shape their ideas about play and themselves. She hopes to use Girl Tech as a force to help change those surroundings. She and her team will develop products in five areas that they say affect children's attitudes and their perception of the world: the business world; the family; schools; broadcast, recorded, and online media; and other children. Girl Tech has also developed a Web site, packed with games, opportunities to send messages to other girls, book reviews, and links to Internet sites reviewed by Girl Tech (see http: //www.girltech.com). In February, around the time when Hasbro is set to launch the Girl Tech line, IDG Books Worldwide, publisher of the "for Dummies" series of computer books, will bring out Tech Girl's Internet Adventures, a guide to more than 200 girl-friendly Internet sites. The book will come with a CD-ROM carrying software that will let girls create their own Web site, which they. In addition, says Swanson, she is talking to a major Internet service about creating a girls' area that would include content and links reviewed by Girl Tech. What about the millions of girls who don't use the Internet? Swanson is developing projects for movie and television production companies. She's planning to create a film or TV series starring the adventurous Tech Girl-whose personality and adventures are still top secret, but who will reflect the themes that permeate all of Girl Tech's work. No matter what the product, or where girls use it, the women at Girl Tech hope that their toys and games will give millions of girls the bone-deep feeling that technology belongs to them. "I'd like to see us standing tall next to Barbie," says Swanson. Rhona Mahony is a visiting scholar at Yale Law School. She is writing a book on women and the computer industry and is the author of "Kidding Ourselves: Breadwinning, Babies, and Bargaining Power" (Basic Books // I look in the mirror &; say good-bye to my face. It's 7:30, the morning of my plastic surgery. I'm due at the does in an hour. When I first go to see him I say, "I like my face, not the effects of gravity." I mean the downward drift of my features that seems to be inscribing the downward drift of my life. The doc's name is Mark A. Erlich. He suggests a face-lift, an eye job, and a chin implant. I decline the implant, imagining infection or slippage. He reaches into the top drawer of his desk and tosses me a small rubber rectangle with a couple of holes punched out. I flex it, liking the feel. I ask about the holes, and he says that's where, in time, tissue anchors the added part. Next, he takes a picture of my left profile. It appears on a computer screen. With an electronic stylus, he erases a fold of skin on my upper eyelid, a extends from nose to chin and gives my mouth a puppet aspect. More erasing, and the loose flesh under my chin disappears, and then the chin itself is extended, becoming aligned with my forehead and nose. I take in the effect, and I'm sold. In minutes, I've shifted from opposing an invasion by a foreign object to accepting the melding of rubber and my flesh. The new position feels like one I've weighed, although I haven't. "How much?" I ask. He says, "Twelve thousand dollars." I have thought I would do this for a long time. I saved for it. My body is home, and surgery is home repair. You need a new roof and weather stripping, no one argues with you. I like looking in the mirror. It doesn't hurt anyone. Vanity (the pleasure we take in our qualities, even our disavowal of vanity) is different from wanting flattery, which to me means isn't, can't be. I like imagining cells engaged in beaverlike activity. I like thinking, period. It's autoerotic, the mind being part of the body and thoughts, therefore, possessing a physical dimension. Thinking, masturbating, looking in the mirror-all encapsulating pleasures, happy narcissism. Let's call this the self-care element. There's something else: my impulse to negotiate life so much through the body. I deal with loss and disappointment by mobilizing the flesh-comforting it, training it-finding a way of reversing the passive position. It's a defense with benign applications. When I look in the mirror and think, "Fine," I can say, "Fuck you" to people who intimidate me. I can do that without the mirror, but the mirror helps if I wind up hurt. There's a third, twisted piece in my head: a carping voice that says, "You need to be fixed." At this point in life, though I still because a I'm my mother's daughter, b I'm female goods in a dick-driven market, and c I'm human), I don't allow it to make my decisions. I say, "Oh, it's you again," and I hunt for the trigger du jour. The truth is, I don't hate my neurotic patterns, don't wish them purged or myself normalized. As with my sexual kinks (pleasures concocted from the raw materials of sorrow and defeat), they remind me what I'm made of, map my trajectories past helplessness. At all times, as I undergo the face-lift, I'm juggling self-care, defense, and carping, trying to keep them straight, though to do so entirely is impossible. I want to be alert, especially, if the voice that picks on me assumes disproportionate weight. Sometimes it does, but I don't forget the other motives, which have more sway these days in controlling the show. Erlich's article on cosmetic surgery, interviewed a slew of doctors, studied their procedures, and watched an operation. She deemed Erlich warm, his fees moderate. I know a woman he's worked on who looks terrific. I meet with her. We're about the same age, with similar slim builds and Mediterranean skin. A year after her surgery, there are no visible scars, and her taut jawline seems an arrow to my future. She says she felt no pain after the operation and healed easily but that, a week or so later, she became depressed. She isn't sure why. I wonder if her fantasies of change exceeded what, in reality, a knife could effect-if that's what depressed her. She reminds me again to hunt for my own devious wishes, lest I be left with them (like egg) on my face. Still, talking to her fortifies my inclination toward Erlich. I think I should research the operation further. After all, it involves blood I'm subjecting my body to incisions and trauma-is what I want to avoid. I don't want facts in my way. I agree to have the lift in two weeks. I'm moving fast. I want to take care of myself, yes, but there's a trigger for the timing, the urgency. His name is Evan. I've just been dumped, and the face-lift is part of a conversation I'm having with him in my head. I've known him a year, been involved half that time. It's been a roller-coaster trip: closeness alternating with withdrawal on his part, a clearing of air leading to more intimacy and, inevitably, punishment for my being "too happy," as he once put it. He didn't want me to expect affection to grow. He chose to end it by starting an affair with someone else. He asked me to stay with him, then changed his mind and wanted out. I wasn't only done to He appreciated my mind maybe more than anyone. But the disappointment was wretched. This happens a week before my fifty-second birthday. The night he confesses his affair, I'm unaware that anything's brewing and dress for the date. The face I see in the mirror must look okay, even pretty, because surgery isn't on my mind. Surgery had flitted in and out of my head while we were together, but his attraction to me drained some of the need. When he pulls out, I feel the rejection as a criticism of my flesh. It's my pattern, although it wasn't his complaint. But for me, the age in my face casts reproach, and my body, too, looks sad, as if the problem has been in me, my body, something that can be mended, though in reality there is nothing I can do. I say to Evan he can't call or see me, wanting to check my fantasies of resuming. The fantasies nature). Evan's body is muscular and beautiful; in my go-into-action mode, the face-lift is a way to level the playing field. I look in the mirror and say, "You're not going to get me," addressing everyone who's ever broken my heart. I would postpone the surgery if I thought losing my boyfriend were its only fuel. It's not, but briefly it gains inordinate weight. I tell everyone I'm planning the lift. To hell with body police, whether zealots who oppose abortion rights or others who judge the desire for beauty to be mere social conformity. To hell with the idea that the changes over which we have no control, like aging, are acceptable, while changes we can influence -- through surgery, bodybuilding, and tattooing-are suspect. My friend John is the most negative, fearing pain and physical risk. He thinks I'll be disappointed when the new face doesn't conjure a new man. I say I'm used to disappointment's reservations go into me or echo some of my own, because the day I pay Erlich, I feel deflated. What if I do die on the table? People will mutter: "Live by the mirror, die by the mirror." Some friends are so enthusiastic, I feel stung. Do I need the work that badly? I imagine my face with years erased, musing on pictures of me when I was younger. At 25, wind whips my hair and I stare at the camera devoid of irony. At 40, my hair is cropped and bushy, and I look hopeful. After the lift, I'm not going to lie about my age, but I like the thought of confounding people-as well as my own assumptions about 50. When I was 14, I'd try to imagine myself in two power-laden years: 1984 and 2000. In' 84, at 37, I'd have duplicated my parents' prickly marriage and predictable, family-centered existence. In the and look gray. As these thoughts would gather, my head would fill with fog and I'd think: "Shoot me now." Today, without children, I feel the body of 14. Perhaps, too, because I'm childless and have no way to project myself physically into the future, nothing drains my desire to prolong youth. I want the face of 25 or of 40-but with the knowledge I've gained since. By the morning of the operation, the aging in my face has assumed grotesque proportions. I am looking at myself as I imagine Evan did at his most unsympathetic-in other words, in my most carping way. On the subway, I reason that the new face will soon look like me, becoming etched, as it must, by my emotions and gestures. At the office, while Erlich marks me with crayons to guide his incisions, I banter jokingly. I've signed forms informing me of a variety of rare but possible results, like asymmetry. "Great, if I don't die under anesthesia." He says he hasn't lost one yet. Photograph Row above: before surgery; row below: ten days after surgery // We enter the operating room, next to his office, as casually as if going for coffee. As the sedative enters my veins, I slip below consciousness. The next thing I know, three hours have passed and Erlich is saying that everything's fine and that I look great. My face is encircled with bandages, from the top of my head to my chin. My friend Esther, who has come to pick me up, is there cheering me, and the scene reminds me in a weird way of the triathlon races at which I'd rooted for Evan. I believed in his body, and I believe in mine, in its ability to obey and contain me. I'm looking forward to recovery as a space to be an animal, take a break from my mind. I'm back I sit on the floor outside his office, awaiting his arrival. He dresses my incisions, removes two drains in the back of my head, and rewraps me. A few days later, with scarf and sunglasses, I ride the subway to his office, eliciting no stares, though, granted, there's a lot of competition for attention down here. At no time during this period am I in pain. I feel discomfort, yes, soreness, tightness. I'm a hardy beast, a fit athlete. I don't smoke, do drugs, or drink much, so throw that in the hopper. But whatever has been said about pain and postsurgical disfigurement, it's not my story. There are incompetent doctors. People die from anesthesia and other risks. It's important to shop for an established surgeon and talk to her/his patients. Warnings serve consumers, but scare stories about cosmetic surgery, which proliferate in the media, are also fingers wagged at people-mainly women, and out to be masochists for (a) conforming to superficial ideals and (b) electing suffering as the price for beauty. No one wants to look good merely because of social pressure. Attractiveness is fun; it feels good. To our guilt -- seeking minds, it's not possible to have fun and feel good without paying a dire price. In reality, it is. I'm told I look pretty, revitalized, and younger than my years, but not necessarily younger than before. One friend thinks I appear more mature, the chin creating classical proportions and changing my previous "childlike look." My friend Sandy-we've gone through our life stages together-says she's not thrilled by the prospect of seeing me look younger, thinking it will intensify her sense of having aged. I realize that, in my excitement, I haven't factored in this reaction from peers. In my desire to look younger, I've forgotten that some people need the space to look the age they are loss and desire is so long-standing and complex. For some, the freedom place is doing nothing. I'm on the phone with another woman when she asks, "Do you want Evan to see you?" The question hits me in the stomach, so I know it's true. Though I don't want the relationship, I'm secretly hoping that fixing my flesh will make him desire me again-so I can be let off the hook of being discarded. A male friend thinks I have erased time and, knowing that the women in Evan's life have generally been in their twenties and early thirties, thinks I intended the lift to "wipe out the young girlfriends." The shoe fits. A month has passed. Friends study my face, getting used to it, and I enjoy the attention. The dramas of getting over Evan and changing my face are done. I've cleared the decks to write fiction and a long essay, and most days sit home feeling insecure about to ride the tension, playing with words and forgetting that what I put out will eventually be seen. Will my face change me, packaging seeping under the skin? I'm satisfied for the moment. My looks are less on my mind than in a fair while, though a weird thing has happened: I forget that this face, like every other, changes each day, depending on sleep and emotions. Evan hasn't seen me. I haven't rekindled his desire, and the whole deal of him has lost air. I do have the face, which in a way he inspired-my parting gift, me. I'm still 52, still L. Stone with scary parts and no mate. I collect more looks from strangers these days: the mutual eye candy that makes theater of ordinary life, the pinball effect where things happen if you're there to bounce against. The confidence is exhilarating. If I live long enough to age so much no surgeon can fix it, then I that's what all life is. Author Affiliation Laurie Stone's most recent books are "Laughing in the Dark: A Decade of Subversive Comedy" (Ecco) and "Close to the Bone: Memoirs of Hurt, Rage, and Desire" (Grove). //
// MS Repair 101 Of the many avenues of MS research, repair of damage to the central nervous system is one of the most exciting. It could mean the restoration of function lost to the disease. In MS, myelin, a fatty protein compound that insulates the nerve fibers in the central nervous system, is damaged by an immune attack. Ultimately, myelin scars over, inhibiting signals making their way along the nerves. Immune attacks also damage oligodendrocytes (the cells that make myelin) and the nerve fibers themselves, once they have been stripped of their protective myelin. It is the subsequent "disconnect" along nerve fibers that creates the myriad MS symptoms-from difficulty seeing to problems with balance and coordination. Repairing myelin, oligodendrocytes, and nerve fibers would probably not be sufficient to reverse MS. There must also be a way to stop the immune system from damaging the tissue in the first place. The combination of restoring function and stopping the damage process would mean the end of MS as we know it. The workshop Last October, 120 researchers of the Central Nervous System in Nice, France. The workshop was organized by the National MS Society and co-sponsored by ARSEP (Association pour la Recherche sur la Sclerose en Plaques, a French organization devoted to MS research). Researchers focused on MS injury and natural repair, what stops natural repair, and ways to stimulate repair. Repair... naturally The body repairs some MS lesions-damaged myelin tissue-naturally. But not all of them are fixed. John W. Prineas, MD, FRCP (University of Sydney, Australia), Massimo Filippi, MD (Scientific Institute and Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy), and others presented evidence of the type of repair and reorganization that helps the brain to overcome injury in MS. In some lesions, the body can repair myelin after injury, either by stimulating neighboring oligodendrocytes or by recruiting young oligodendrocytes from farther away. They move to the lesion, mature, and make new myelin. Some participants noted that this natural repair process may actually be stimulated by the inflammation deciphering the molecular "signals" that are sent out from injured areas to recruit replacement cells in the hope of finding ways to mimic these repair signals. Researchers are also investigating a number of proteins known as "growth factors" for their roles in myelin repair and nerve regrowth. Photograph // What inhibits repair? The human body is incredibly resilient-ask anyone who has ever had a broken leg or had their appendix removed. But in MS, the body's tendency to repair itself gets short-circuited. Marie Filbin, PhD (Hunter College, New York, NY), and Stephen Strittmatter, MD, PhD (Yale University New Haven, CT), discussed three different components of myelin that can actually inhibit nerve fiber regrowth. These components may represent targets for future therapies designed to thwart their influence. Photograph // Catherine Lubetzki, MD, PhD (Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris, France), who also co-chaired the workshop, discussed crucial interactions that must occur between nerve fibers and oligodendrocytes in order for. These include electrical impulses as well as molecular signals. During the course of MS, nerve fibers stripped of their myelin can become electrically silent, and without an electrical signal, remyelination may be inhibited. Molecular signals may also be lost, compounding the problem. Researchers at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City discussed their studies examining MS lesions that did not show any signs of remyelination (Nature Medicine 2002, 10: 1115-1121). They found high levels of a molecule, named "Jagged 1," that can restrict the maturation of young oligodendrocytes and thus block remyelination. Other approaches to MS repair Moses Rodriguez, MD (Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN), has been purifying and reproducing antibodies (immune proteins that attach to specific molecules) that can stimulate myelin repair in rodents with MS-like myelin damage. Although it is not yet clear how these antibodies act to encourage remyelination, Dr. Rodriguez reported that they are being readied for safety-testing in people with MS. Ian Duncan William Blakemore, MD, PhD (University of Cambridge, United Kingdom), and others discussed their efforts to replace oligodendrocytes and nerve cells surgically. They are using animal models of myelin damage. Potential sources of replacement cells include skin-derived cells, bone marrow and umbilical-cord blood cells, fetal cells, adult brain cells, and myelin-making cells from the peripheral nervous system, called Schwann cells. In a preliminary safety study, Schwann cells taken from a nerve in patients' ankles have been implanted into MS lesions of a few individual volunteers by investigators from Yale University. The results have not been published. Bright horizon Few scientific fields are changing as quickly as the landscape of tissue repair. Scientists uncovered the potential of diverse cells, such as those found in skin and bone marrow, to transform into brain cells only last year. It appears that our bodies contain a virtually limitless source of replacement cells-which may be exploited if the right signals can be found to stimulate their proper transformation and growth into healthy new tissue at the Society and Gary Sullivan is managing editor of this magazine. //
// A good-looking man rolled to the stop sign as I rounded the corner on my scooter. He greeted me; I guess I looked bewildered. "You were my grade school counselor," he said. I was pleased; I wondered which child he had been. I had worked as a counselor at the Mendocino Grammar School in 1995 as an intern. I enjoyed great success with the children and had a good relationship with my peers. There was a job opening for a school psychologist for the following year. I applied; I thought I was a shoo-in. My rsum was impressive and I had been doing the job for a year. I waited eagerly to hear when my interview would be. Three days before school started, I received a call from the principal saying someone else had been hired. I was never even offered an interview. I wanted that job! According to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), all pre-offer inquiries about an individual's diagnosis or possible future disability are prohibited. Interviewers can ask about current readily disclosed; everyone knew I had MS. It was no big deal. Or so I thought. Had I been more savvy, I might have thought I was being discriminated against. Instead, I decided to move on. Does disclosure hurt? Pamela Hirshberg, programs manager at the National MS Society's Southern California Chapter, advises her clients that it might. She strongly urges people to think through how their peers and supervisors might react and to practice what they will ask for with an employment counselor or advisor. "In my employment groups, I tell people not to disclose unless they need a specific accommodation," Hirshberg said. "Even then, they don't need to tell their diagnosis. They need to explain how an accommodation will solve problems caused by a medical condition," she said. Does ADA protect us? According to ADA attorney Charles Goldman, who practices in Washington, D.C., enforcement issues are rarely clear-cut. ADA provisions are a continuing process... open to interpretation non-compliance. But most never go to litigation according to Pamela Hirshberg. "To go to litigation an employer would have to say you were refused a job, or terminated, or not promoted because you have MS. Employers are too smart to do that nowadays," she said. There are many more subtle ways for employers to discriminate. The best, most specialized attorneys may know all the fine points. If you decide to make a formal complaint, it is also very important to have your neurologist on board. You may be called on to provide professional medical opinion about whether you can do a specific job. Clearly fighting employment discrimination in court is difficult, expensive, time-consuming, and emotionally draining. But ADA does offer us some protection because it has helped change public attitudes. Some background I first heard the phrase "reasonable accommodation" years before it became the cornerstone of the ADA. It appeared in the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which covered federal employees, and it heralded a change adopted policies of this act long before ADA made them legally obligated to do so. // The ADA was passed by Congress in 1990. It was the first comprehensive legislation passed by any country to prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability. It covers all aspects of the employment relationship, from recruitment to firing, and it goes well beyond those issues to provide protections in public facilities, including transportation, telephones, and more. Historically, ADA is an extension of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, guaranteeing full participation in American society for all people with disabilities, just as the Civil Rights Act guaranteed this for all people regardless of their race, sex, national origin, or religion. The landscape for people with disabilities has changed dramatically in the years since. Before that time it was unusual to see disabled people who were working. Today, attitudinal barriers continue to break down as more people with disabilities become employed. Moreover, employers are aware that there are guidelines as to what constitutes discrimination.. It doesn't apply only to those in wheelchairs. It covers every person with an impairment that "substantially limits one or more major life activities." Invisible symptoms like MS fatigue or bladder dysfunction clearly fit this definition. Initially people thought about ADA making workplaces wheelchair accessible. They weren't thinking about people with MS who might require an adjusted schedule because of issues of stamina. But an adjusted schedule can be a reasonable accommodation based on the "must do" functions of a job. Suppose you are a toll taker on a free-way and MS fatigue leaves you too tired to get to work. You can't expect the highway department to keep you on. (You could ask for a different type of job.) But if you were an accountant for the highway department, you might say, "Let's adjust my schedule." A vacant desk and a vacant tollbooth are two different stories. Adjusting an accountant's schedule could be considered a reasonable accommodation, according to attorney Charles reasonable accommodations keep many people with disabilities employed, and that in turn slowly educates the public about us. The more visible we are, the better. For that reason I roll in the Fourth of July parade in my town every year. When I'm out in public, I'm helping to raise public awareness about people who use wheelchairs. Did ADA work for me? By 1990 my function was noticeably declining. I struggled more and more with fatigue and with pain. I have an MA in Art History and was working as an art critic. I could no longer climb stairs or do the hustling necessary for my job. I agonized about what I should do. With the help of my therapist, I decided to study psychology and become a psychotherapist. A friend told me that California's Department of Rehabilitation (DOR) would help people who needed to make career changes for health reasons, so I contacted them. My DOR counselor was a wonderful man named Stan White. He worked with other excellent counselors. With their help I entered a graduate program and received my MA in Clinical Psychology in 1993. The DOR helped pay my tuition and subsidized books and school supplies. But then my career plans derailed. My marriage ended. I was on my own. And my MS was progressing. I had to move to a rural community, and there I had to develop my own counseling internships. I ended up working with many different populations-from children to alcohol and drug addicts. In all my internships, reasonable accommodations were made for me without questions. I was granted flexible work hours. The DOR purchased an adapted van to carry me and my scooter. Driving instruction was provided. Occupational therapists (OTs) designed plans to minimize my fatigue and maximize my function. It was done with great sensitivity. My life was on a roll. // Then came "The Driving Evaluation." Here I got into some murky territory. The driving test was scheduled over a three-day period. able-bodied person having to climb a wall as part of a driving test. On the final day I was not allowed to drive when my energy was at its peak. The same OT who had taught me to minimize the impact of my fatigue by scheduling tasks for my best times, now insisted that I do several extra transfers, and take the test after I was totally exhausted. I did not pass. I appealed and was granted a new evaluation, but it had to be done in a distant city, where the three-day exam would be compressed into a single day. I tried to argue, but the OT insisted that they needed to see me "at my worst." Ultimately, I was advised to close my file with the DOR. The hand controls would be removed from the van and I would no longer be able to drive. I had no other options, so, reluctantly, I took their advice. I am still processing this loss. Since that time I have works well. There is much work to be done. With my background, I feel well qualified to be part of whatever comes next. Where we all are now Despite ongoing problems, the world is very different from what it was before the ADA. Today individuals with disabilities are far more likely to be contributing their abilities and their intellects to their communities. And the world gets something back. Not to sound like a Pollyanna, but as a therapist, my MS has given me insights into the human spirit I couldn't have imagined before dealing with this disease. Of course, if they found a cure tomorrow, I would take it. After all, I'd still have the insights. Sidebar "To go to litigation an employer would have to say you were refused a job, or terminated, or not promoted because you have MS. Employers are too smart to do that nowadays." -Pamela Hirshberg Sidebar What to do if you experience disability discrimination Contact your National MS Society's on negotiating with your employer, your chapter may be able to refer you to a professional mediator. If, ultimately, you want to file a legal charge, shop around for a lawyer. Don't assume that the person who did your real estate closing knows the ADA. Call your state or local bar association and ask for someone who is experienced in employment law. Ask if he or she represents management or employees. Don't be afraid to ask the dirty question, "What are your fees?" -J.D. Sidebar Today individuals with disabilities are far more likely to be contributing their abilities and their intellects to their communities. And the world gets something back. Sidebar On our Web site For more information on employment, cognition, and fatigue, go to: **36;3774;TOOLONG **44;3812;TOOLONG **42;3858;TOOLONG Author Affiliation Joanne Dickson is a freelance writer and a therapist in Mendocino, California. //
From discoveries about the universe we live in to products created here on earth, we salute 100 of 1994's top science and technology achievements with our seventh annual Best of What's New Awards. This year saw the discovery of one of matter's tiniest building blocks and that of the first planets outside our solar system. Closer to home, $1 prescription eyeglasses were invented as was a test to diagnose heart-attack victims quickly. The products honored this year promise a not-too-distant future of greater ease and enjoyment: Included are a microwave clothes dryer, a car that remembers cabin settings, safer in-line skates, and a computer that's also a cable-ready TV, stereo, speaker phone, and game machine all rolled into one. Continuing a tradition, we have selected a Grand Winner in each of ten categories. The Light Fantastic A conventional flashlight's flaw is obvious: You need a third hand to use it while you're working. So Black &; Decker's SnakeLight loops, twists, and bends to suit any task. You can wrap it over your it to stand on its own. SnakeLight comes in three versions for home, workshop, and automotive uses and costs from $30 to $35. Fossil Mammals See them jump! See them climb! See them hunt! The awesome critters in a spectacular new addition to New York's American Museum of Natural History, from giant elk to a ferocious "bear-dog," are mounted in poses that reflect their lifestyles in past eras. Complemented by interactive computer displays, the uniquely informative exhibits are organized so that the visitor moves through them in a remarkably intuitive and user-friendly way along a major evolutionary tree. The Bug Is Back VW's Concept I is a modern-day revival of the car that once defined the automotive counterculture. Today the styling seems fresh once again. But more important, the car's three different powerplant design options -- including an innovative diesel/electric hybrid -- explore the outer reaches of fuel efficiency and alternative power. The concept may well become a reality, if VW goes ahead with announced plans to produce 1,700-pound eight-legged robot named Dante II wowed scientists with an adventurous trek across the crater of an active volcano. Braving falling boulders and earthquakes, the semiautonomous machine took video images and sampled the gases from vents in the rocky ground. Although Dante II needed help to get out -- it had tipped over and had to be retrieved by helicopter -- it demonstrated that robots can successfully explore distant, dangerous places. Ultimate EOS Canon's top-of-the-line autofocus single-lens-reflex 35mm camera, the EOS-1, has now been topped by the EOS-1N. The new model adds a host of improvements that meets the special needs of professionals and advanced amateurs, including: mirror lock-up to prevent vibration, silent rewind, the ability to focus quickly on any of five different points, and five metering patterns. The camera's list price is approximately $2,400. Synthesizing Virtuosity The best musicians can push a technically well-played tune to artistry by adding personally distinctive sounds, such as the squeaks from over-blowing a horn or breathiness from under-puffing an oboe. But no matter produce such natural sounds-until now. The $4,995 Yamaha VL1 Virtual Acoustic Synthesizer lets keyboardists add emphasis by puffing through its innovative headset. Island of Mystery The $60 Myst is multimedia intrigue at its best, exploiting the CD-ROM format like no other entertainment software. The adventure game transports you to an island world with beautifully drawn 3-D graphics, mystery-shrouded video clips, eerie sound effects, and an original musical score. These elements complement a story line that's intelligent enough to lure adults -- and unpredictable enough to keep them coming back. Model Notebook Toshiba's Portege establishes new standards for small, lightweight notebook computers. It is the first "sub-notebook" to sport a brilliant thin-film-transistor color screen, and the first portable PC of any kind to use the long-lasting lithium-ion battery. The newest model, the Portege T3600CT, beefs up internally with a 50-megahertz 486DX2 chip, a 250-megabyte hard disk, and eight megabytes of memory. Price: $1,299 to $4,799. Grand Award Aviation &; Space Cosmic Catastrophe When the fragments of comet of millions of hydrogen bombs, virtually every major telescope was focused on the event. The spectacle alone was worth it: The largest fragment produced a fireball 50 times brighter to infrared telescopes than the planet itself. Astronomers say that collected data will reveal information about Jupiter's composition and help explain how previous comets may have affected life on Earth. The Clean Diesel Long-haul diesel proponents now have a truly modern choice: Mercedes-Benz engineers have satisfied the clean-air agencies in all 50 states with a six-cylinder engine design that attacks the dual demons of diesel combustion: soot and oxides of nitrogen. Precombustion chambers in the four-valve-per-cylinder head and an oxidation catalyst combine with exhaust-gas recirculation and a variable air-intake system -- both under microchip control -- for cleaner warmup and cruising. E300 diesel sedans start at $40,000. Over-The-Air Cable TV Cost-cutting competition for your cable-TV company typically doesn't exist. Now, wireless technology that costs a fraction of building a ground-based cable system promises to give you more for your cable-TV dollar. CellularVision of New York has. A small transmitter sends the same programming produced by cable-TV companies over the air to receiving antennas that are within a three-mile radius. Light At The End Of The Chunnel After centuries of pondering and puttering, the Channel Tunnel (or "Chunnel") finally opened this May for freight service amidst much fanfare. A grand engineering accomplishment, the 31-mile-long, three-tube system -- the world's longest underwater tunnel -- was bored out of the sticky chalk that lines the bottom of the English Channel. The rail passage between Great Britain and France will enable cars, trucks, and passengers to travel between Folkestone, England, and Calais, France, connecting England with Europe for the first time since the Ice Age. The Never-Set VCR Clock Now you can impress your family, friends, and neighbors with your apparent ability to program your VCR -- if you have Sony's SLV-770HF ($599) or SLV-920HF ($649) models. These VCRs automatically set their own display clocks by using a chip that reads a time TV signal that is reserved for extended data services. Rough Rover Reflecting the heritage and off-road capability that sets Range Rover apart, the Land Rover Discovery is a prestige sport utility at a reasonable, $29,525 base price. Its aluminum body and a long-travel suspension engineered for hard use add up to an unusual capacity for hard going. Comfortable seating, good ergonomics, a big cargo area, and rugged styling lend a luxury-car feel to a vehicle that's equally at home in the wilds. Two Lines From One AT &T; Paradyne's DataPort 2001 modem ($549) is first to let you talk and send data simultaneously over one standard phone line. Assuming the person at the other end has a compatible modem, two people could be looking at the same computer screen, for example, while conversing. This VoiceSpan technology is also expected to show up in some dedicated fax machines, making it possible for two people to talk and fax on one line. Peer Through Walls Zircon's prototype radar locator doesn't row of LEDs. But using ultra-wideband radar technology developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the tool is the first radar that can identify steel, wood, and plastic tubing hidden behind heretofore-impenetrable materials such as concrete, as well as drywall. Future versions of the tool could assist in search-and-rescue operations in collapsed buildings. Batter Up! Step up to the plate and swing away against simulated big-league pitchers with Sports Sciences' Batter Up, a fusion of video game and batting cage. As a ball appears to come toward you, on the monitor, you swing a life-size soft-foam bat with an embedded infrared transmitter that sends a signal when the bat is swung with force. The handle houses all the controls needed for game play. Batter Up works with Nintendo's SNES, Sega Genesis, and Sega CD baseball titles. Price: $129 (cordless) or $69 (corded). Grand Award Recreation Easy Rider Bicycle maker Girvin didn't reinvent the wheels, but it did engineer several other features into the Proflex In addition to having front and rear shock absorbers, the Proflex adds a radical frame design. The compact main triangle allows for a longer rear-suspension unit than other bikes, to soak up big bumps. The frame also enables those under five feet, five inches in height to comfortably traverse the outback with full-sized wheels. Price: about $1,599. Unshackling The Circular Saw DeWalt cuts ahead of other battery-powered tool makers with cordless circular saws that have a blade large enough to saw through a 2x4 on a single swipe. The saws, which are equipped with a 5-3/8-inch thin-kerf carbide blade, are available with either a 12- or 14.4-volt rechargeable battery. The 14.4-volt DW935K model is available for about $230; the 12-volt DW930K, $200. 24-Hour Video-Game Delivery The Sega Channel demonstrates that cable can deliver more than just programs. Households can now receive video games through a channel that is dedicated to data transmission. The data is sent to a memory cartridge that is inserted into the game-cartridge port of any Sega Genesis System. You are offered regularly. Subscribers should pay about $14 a month in addition to their basic cable bill. Powerful Package The PowerPC microprocessor's promise becomes reality in Apple's Power Macintosh series. Propelled by the efficient **32;433;TOOLONG (RISC) chip, Power Macs zip through complex tasks far more quickly than previous Macs -- or most Windows PCs. For scientific, math, and graphics work, Power Macs are the hands-down champions. Add speech recognition and Windows-compatibility options, and you've got the most versatile PCs around. Cost: about $2,000 to $4,500. Running With Fury Reebok's Instapump Fury running shoe has everything you need -- and nothing you don't. The midsole was cut out because runners hit the pavement with the heels and balls of their feet, rather than the middle. Replacing "heavy" leather and laces are light, breathable mesh and air bladders that inflate with an on-board Pump button or a C0 sub 2 cartridge. Each Instapump Fury weighs 8.5 ounces -- 25 percent less than most running shoes By all but proving Fermat's famously intractable Last Theorem, a Princeton University mathematician may have solved a 300-year-old problem. The theorem is simple to state: The equation x sup n + y sup n = z sup n can not be solved when exponent n is greater than 2. But the proof is anything but simple: It took Andrew Wiles more than 200 pages of dense formulas. Understandably, Wiles accidentally left out a step, which he is now working on. In any case, colleagues agree that the breakthrough work will make a lasting contribution to their field. Appointment Watcher From bars of light flashing across a computer screen, the Timex Data Link Watch takes only seconds to load up to 27 entries of weekly appointments, pertinent phone numbers, and anniversary reminders. The watch's light sensor reads the flashing light bars, communicating the information to the watch. The pulses of light equate to the digital ones and zeros that computers use to run programs. The $130 watch comes with the required room's dimensions just got immeasurably easier. The first laser measuring tool, Disto shoots a beam of light to any object from eight inches to approximately 300 feet away, then displays the distance in English or metric units. Unlike ultrasonic devices, the red laser-light dot produced by Disto shows that you've aimed as intended. Accurate to within 1/8 inch, Disto was developed by Leica AG and is also marketed by Sonin. The measuring tool costs about $1,400. Luxury Redefined A sporting sedan that handles a party of four in comfort, the Oldsmobile Aurora represents a new, from-the-ground-up approach to luxury-car design. Starting with a body structure that sets new standards for rigidity, the Aurora adds refined suspension tuning for solid road manners and high performance. With its new aluminum 32-valve V8, the Aurora takes a high-tech route to producing power in a small-displacement engine. Base price: $31,995. Grand Award Audio &; Video Dish It Up Now you don't have to go to the video store or have a cable hookup Satellite System (DSS), you simply press a few keys on your remote control to watch pay-per-view movies beamed from a satellite. DSS also provides access to cable channels and CD-quality music. The system's dish antenna is only 18 inches across, so it is relatively inconspicuous when installed. The basic system costs $699; there are monthly and pay-per-view service charges. Surveying Made Simple Measuring inclines and leveling areas have always been tricky jobs best left for professionals; now Stanley Tools' Compulevel makes them easy. Place the base unit at one end of the work site, then unreel the cord to the other end. Press a button, and the tool displays the elevation change. The technology should find its way to other applications that require measuring differences in height. Available by year's end, Compulevel should cost about $700. The Everything Machine Compaq's Presario 520 CD-TV is an **31;467;TOOLONG multimedia computer in a uniquely elegant package. The Presario includes a computer, 14-inch display, cable-ready TV tuner, answering audio CDs. For rich images and sound, the system supports 256 colors and has a double-speed CD-ROM drive and 16-bit stereo sound card. The TV tuner has jacks for a VCR or video-game system. Price: $1,899. Magic Mirror Display A new technology promises brighter and larger TV pictures than ever before. While normal TVs rely on cathode-ray tubes, Texas Instruments' experimental Digital Micromirror Display creates an image by mechanically moving thousands of tiny mirrors suspended above a silicon chip. Light of any brightness can then be reflected off the mirrors to generate magazine-quality color on screens the size of a living-room wall. Coming Soon To A Runway Near You The next-generation Boeing 777 airliner took flight in June with the most powerful jet engines ever made. With 80,000 pounds of thrust, the giant twin engines make the plane more fuel-efficient than a three- or four-engine aircraft but are as quiet as the smaller engines on a 767. With a wider body than any jetliner except the Boeing 747, the 777 can carry as many as a game show on TV one thing, but actually participating in the show is quite another. With Twisted, a simulated TV game show, you control realistic-looking on-screen contestants: The CD-based game, from Electronic Arts for 3DO machines, lets up to four people play a zany game show complete with video puzzles, sound effects, and trivia. Twisted costs about $60. Versatile Minivan Removing the rear seat from a minivan when you want to carry cargo can be a nuisance. Odyssey, Honda's new Accord-based minivan, offers a superb solution: a rear seat that folds into the floor. Odyssey also looks and handles a lot like a station wagon: It's closer to the ground than other minivans and is equipped with four hinged doors. It shares the Accord's 2.2-liter 16-valve powerplant and should retail for about $23,000. Go-Anywhere Data Merge the simplicity of pagers with the power of computers, and you get the Nationwide Wireless Network, a cord-free data-communications network being constructed by Mtel. Microsoft is lending software. Due to operate in 300 cities next year, the network will deploy an army of receiving stations so the two-way communicators can be small, low-power devices that last a month on batteries and don't need antennas. Smart Walls Developed at the University of Dayton, experimental phase-change wallboard will not just keep the elements out -- it will also help control climate within a house. Tiny beads of paraffin embedded in the wallboard change phases, from liquid to solid, at a specific temperature. So when room air exceeds or drops below that level, the wallboard absorbs or releases heat to keep rooms comfortable. The wallboard could save up to 20 percent of house space-conditioning costs. Grand Award Automotive Technology Aluminum Audi The Audi A8 represents one of the few truly innovative efforts to combine a body structure and manufacturing process that maximize aluminum's benefits. The result is a lightweight, extremely strong luxury car that gains in all areas. The manufacturing plant, developed by Audi and Alcoa Aluminum, also breaks new ground with that makes aluminum practical for extensive use in future cars. The A8 is available in Europe. Silver Shooter The palm-size Pentax UC-1 might qualify as a spy camera -- if not for its flashy silver reflective coating. The camera can focus as close as 12 inches; even at that distance, an auto parallax adjustment system yields a perfect image of the actual picture in the viewfinder -- no more lopped off heads. Other features: a precise 259-step autofocusing system, remote control, and auto flash. Price: $245 list. Six Sides: Better Than Round In the staid realm of washing machines, Staber Industries' System 2000 makes waves by saving water two ways: Its wash basket is flipped on its side, so clothes slosh through a relatively small amount of water. And the wash basket and tub are hexagonal; the flat sides paddle water through the perforations with more force. System 2000 halves the water used by conventional machines and saves detergent too. Cost: $800 to $900. Ocean Explorer Cheaper Odyssey II proved itself in two tests this year: It studied crack formation beneath the Arctic ice off the coast of Alaska in March, and then dove to the site of an underwater eruption off the coast of Washington in August. Odyssey II will help scientists gather oceanographic data, monitor fish stocks, and inspect pipelines. Stylish Minivan By adapting elements of a front-drive passenger car platform to a spacious people-carrier, the Ford Windstar establishes new ride and handling benchmarks for minivans with the traction and space efficiencies of front-wheel drive and fully independent suspension. An innovative feature that enhances seating flexibility is the sliding rear seat, which moves forward to create more cargo room without requiring removal. Price starts at $19,455. Goodbye, Glint Reflections from eyeglasses, binoculars, rifle scopes, and other optical devices can be fatal if they betray a soldier's position. The killFlash shield developed by Tenebraex Corp. could protect soldiers by suppressing glint with a honeycomb grid that fits over lenses. Anti-glint shields could also be used in automobile shields would make them look like part of the car body. Electronic Navigator The Guidestar navigation system developed by Zexel, USA, and refined by Oldsmobile represents a trend likely to be emulated by other car makers. The $2,000 option on the Olds 88 uses a GPS-based guidance system to locate the car, then refers to digitally stored maps to plot a path to your destination. As similar guidance systems catch on, you may never get lost again. NO sub X Stopper More than half of the electricity in the United States is generated with coal. Now, technology from Asea Brown Boveri burns powderized coal more cleanly by as much as a factor of seven. Using carefully controlled amounts of combustion air, the TFS 2000 industrial-furnace design cuts oxides of nitrogen (NO sub x) emissions from a conventional 500 to 1,000 parts per million to 150. Next year, the technology will be used in a 245-megawatt steam generator in Virginia. Eyes-On Camera The ultimate dream machine would obey your thoughts. That remains mere Movieboy E1, which features functions that respond to eye movement. Using technology adapted from Canon's EOS still camera, Movieboy lets you operate, for example, zooming and playback by focusing your eyes on commands or icons. Priced at about $2,000, the camcorder is available now in Japan; U.S. sales are planned for 1995. Grand Award Cars Roomy Compacts Clouds lent their names to Chrysler Corp.'s aggressively sculpted compact sedans, the Dodge Stratus (top) and Chrysler Cirrus. Well-equipped with a standard V6 engine and showing adept road manners, the roomy Cirrus ($17,970 base price) provides a spacious interior bedecked with luxury features. Its Dodge Stratus sister car (available next February) adds two four-cylinder engine choices and a five-speed manual transmission. These fresh Chrysler products are further evidence of new thinking in Michigan. Double-Duty VCR With Go-Video's GV 8050 VCR, copying the videotapes you took with your 8mm or High-B camcorder to the VHS format is as easy as pushing a button. This dual-deck, and assembly editing, where you can put together scenes from as many as eight different sources. Using the $1,099 VCR's external computer port and additional editing software, you can do even more complex editing. Heart Alarms A new blood test developed at Baylor College of Medicine takes the time-consuming uncertainty out of diagnosing possible heart-attack victims. While a standard blood-enzyme test requires 12 to 14 hours, the Baylor test yields a result in two hours or less. Now used at 70 hospitals, the $40 test could save up to $4 billion a year and cut coronary-care-unit admissions by 70 percent. Oh, My Darling Clementine, the first U.S. craft to visit the moon in a quarter-century, is proof that NASA's "smaller, faster, cheaper" mantra is more than just rhetoric. The 500-pound spacecraft was designed and built in only two years, for just $80 million. Jointly developed by NASA and the Pentagon, Clementine could be model for future military-civilian cooperation. Like its namesake, though, Clementine is now to Earth more than one million images of the lunar surface. The Fix Is In Even products like inexpensive hair dryers and electric razors soon could be practical to repair, thanks to new industrial software called Design for Service. The software from Boothroyd Dewhurst uses lists of questions and suggestions (photo) to help industrial designers consider ease of repair when creating new products. Xerox is among the software's purchasers, and Ford plans to use the industrial software to design two 1999-model cars. World Cars Designed without compromise, the Ford Contour (left) and Mercury Mystique stand in the vanguard of automotive engineering. With every important component given a ground-up redesign -- including a new chassis, two engine options, transmission, and even new steering gear -- the cars incorporate innovative basic engineering and sophisticated electronic control systems. The extensive achievement should influence products from Ford and other makers for years to come. Base price: $13,310. Sophisticated Off-Roader Ford's Explorer advances the concept of a rugged, versatile sport utility with a The system is semiautomatic, running in two-wheel drive until tire slip is detected, then transferring power to all four wheels. The 1995 Explorer also incorporates new safety features, including four-wheel disc brakes and dual air bags. Base price should be about $27,000. Tech Toilet The most sophisticated water-stingy commode among today's low-flush models is the Fluidizer from Control Fluidics. The unit combines a pressurized rinse with a blenderlike system that renders all solid material liquid -- so less water is needed to transport the wastes to sewage systems. Indeed, the Fluidizer consumes just 2.3 quarts per flush, while standard low-flush toilets use nearly three times that amount. Walk-Through Windows The GDL Cabrio Balcony Roof Window from Velux is the first to transform from a roof window into a step-out balcony with the flip of a latch. Designed to conform to roof pitches from 35 to 53 degrees, Cabrio can be built into roofs of almost any material. The units measure 100 by 27 inches, and the panes are insulated with energy-efficient argon glass fill Technology Solar-Powered Resort It doesn't look like much, but that's the idea. The world's first solar-powered luxury resort, Harmony was intended to blend into its pristine surroundings inside the U.S. Virgin Islands National Park on St. John. Harmony's eight cottages -- there'll be 32 eventually -- were designed to fit among existing trees. Each cottage is constructed almost entirely from recycled materials, and there are interactive computer programs to teach visitors about Harmony's various environmental and alternative-energy features. Genuine Jaguar The 1995 XJR sedan reprises the graceful lines of classic Jaguars, updated with state-of-the-art underpinnings. The supercharged four-liter in-line six features a unique air-coolant-air intercooler and develops 322 hp at 5,000 rpm and 378 foot-pounds of torque at 3,050 rpm. All-speed traction control, antilock brakes, dual air bags, and improved ergonomics inside add up to the most civilized cat ever. A wood-rimmed steering wheel adds a retro touch. Base price: $65,000. Cheap Heat To boost building-heating efficiency, the elegantly simple perforated aluminum panel called Solarwall pre-warms absorbs as much as 80 percent of the available solar energy -- a record for solar air collectors. Developed by researchers at Conserval and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, the panel sells for $10 per foot and could pay for itself in energy savings in as little as three years. Smaller Is Better Anyone who has wielded a poorly balanced hand tool knows that bigger is not necessarily better. About 15 percent smaller than its competitors, Panasonic's Predator line of cordless drills/drivers sets impressive standards for utility and function. Top-of-the-line models sport a 12-volt battery that recharges in 15 minutes (photo). The motor is variable-speed, reversible, and has 21 torque settings for driving screws. Price range: $199 to $229. Bookshelf Video-CD System The first video CD mini component system, model SC-VC1O from Panasonic plays up to 74 minutes of full-motion videos from five-inch discs using the MPEG-1 digital video-decompression standard with the addition of a TV set. The unit also plays audio CDs and CD + Graphics (karaoke) titles. Sold be available in the United States this fall under the Technics label. T-Bone Protection A regular air bag does little good if your car gets T-boned from the side. First to bring a side-impact bag to market, Swedish designers cleverly located the device in the side of the 1995 Volvo 850's seat side holster -- rather than on a door panel. That means the air bag is always correctly positioned to protect the driver and front-seat passenger, regardless of seat adjustment. A $500 option on 1995 Volvo 850 models, the air bag is standard on 850 Turbo models. Bravo For Brakes Too timid to try in-line skating? Never fear: Automatic Braking Technology (ABT) from Rollerblade now enables anyone to stop with ease and confidence. When you put one foot in front of the other to stop, an arm pushes the brake downward against the ground. Because the wheels don't have to leave the ground while braking, you maintain balance. ABT is available on the new Bravoblade series and on two older Detector After long delays, the first national radar network designed to detect severe thunderstorms and tornadoes is now mostly in place -- and it's exceeding expectations. Nexrad, as the Next Generation Weather Radar is called, relies on high-resolution Doppler radar and modern computer graphics to spot and report the swirling winds indicative of violent storms. Nexrad has doubled average warning times for tornadoes and flash floods and halved the false-alarm rate for all storms. It's A Gas Homeowners who live in areas where electricity prices are high have a new heating-and-cooling alternative: York International's Triathalon, the first residential-size gas-engine-driven heat pump sold in this country. Heat pumps are devices that provide heating and cooling in one unit. Because Triathalon reuses warmth produced by the motor, it heats 40 percent more efficiently than the top-performing furnace; it also cools as efficiently as a dedicated electric air conditioner. Grand Award Home Technology Microwaves: From Popcorn to Pants Its microwave-oven-style door is the tipoff: This is no ordinary clothes dryer. It uses microwaves to. And because microwaves heat the water rather than warm the air (thus "baking" the clothes), the dryer is gentler on fabrics and can even handle silk and wool. Developed by the Electric Power Research Institute with AsTEX/Gerling Laboratories and Thermo Energy Corp., prototype microwave dryers are now being tested. Magic Pair Sony's Magic Link and Motorola's Envoy (shown) are the latest in handheld communicators. (Photo omitted) Each employs General Magic's whimsical Magic Cap interface and "intelligent" Telescript communications system. Magic Link and Envoy both have a standard (corded) fax and data modem inside, and Envoy also includes a wireless radio-frequency modem for greater portability. Magic Link costs about $1,000. Envoy is expected to be available by year's end for about $1,500. Matsushita (Panasonic) and Philips are also working on devices using General Magic software. Speedy Data Traveling Software's SpeedSync blows through network-cable and phone-wire bottlenecks, dramatically increasing the speed of computer file transfers. By recognizing what changes changes rather than the whole file -- boosting speeds by up to 800 percent, and saving time and long-distance charges. SpeedSync appears first in LapLink for Windows. Grip And Go Energy efficiency or high performance? It's been a tradeoff for tire designers -- until now. Michelin's XSE technology reduces rolling resistance by 35 percent and improves traction in wet conditions without skimping on other performance characteristics. A form of silica replaces the conventional carbon black as a strengthening rubber additive. The technology is implemented in five models including the MXV4 (shown). (Photo omitted) Refined Ute With the GMC Jimmy and Chevrolet Blazer, General Motors elevates the design that started the compact-sport-utility craze to a new plateau. The Jimmy/Blazer ($22,438 base) handily executes the difficult hat trick for a sport utility: It blends a smooth ride and reasonable handling with substantial off-road capability. The key was in combining a serious reengineering of the Blazer's suspension with careful tuning of tires and shock-absorber combinations. Space-Radar Lab Using powerful synthetic-aperture-radar imaging stream beds beneath the Sahara Desert's dunes and mapped the 5,000-year-old city of Ubar in Oman. (Sand dunes are at the bottom of the image at right, though the ancient city itself is not visible.) (Photo omitted) The first shuttle mission was conducted in April, and the second blasted off in September. Part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, the Space Radar Laboratory has made measurements of snow packs, geologic features, and ocean wave heights at 19 ecologically sensitive sites, gathering detailed information on natural and human-caused changes. Computer, Take A Memo The first dictation product for Windows PCs, Voice for Windows brings Kurzweil's accurate, large-vocabulary, speaker-independent voice-recognition system to today's most popular software. The speaker-independence eliminates tedious voice "training"; you can begin talking to your PC immediately. The system lets you do spot training as needed to improve accuracy. Voice for Windows includes a sound board and microphone and lists for $995. Minimalism, Italian-Style The Ducati 916 brings the road. Narrow and agile, the 438-pound sport bike has a compact fuel-injected twin-V engine that uses the Italian maker's signature desmodromic valve-actuation system to produce 104 hp. The slightest inputs at the controls elicit a balance of acceleration, braking, and rock-steady cornering most cyclists only experience in daydreams. Price: $14,500. Green Light Because it consumes a scant 0.03 watts, you can praise Limelite for its energy efficiency. Or you can cheer that the night light has no bulb to shatter, or that the slim little light doesn't generate enough heat to cause burns. Limelite uses a durable electroluminescent material to cast that soft, green glow. Developed by Austin Innovations, the device costs about $8. Grand Award Photography Flexible Compact The remarkable Contax G1 35mm camera has reengineered the staid interchangable-lens rangefinder category. The camera's unique design incorporates an autofocus system to complement manual focusing, and a 1/2,000-second top-speed focal-plane shutter. The resulting titanium-clad electronically controlled camera combines the flexibility of a single-lens-reflex with the size and handiness of available. Price of the G1 body: $1,790. Watts New Talk about impressive numbers: The $350 Lightning Charger produces 900 watts of 115-volt DC current, 55 amps for charging, and 80 amps of starting power. But it weighs just 16 pounds and measures less than one cubic foot. The secret: The generator's neodymium iron boron magnets are ten times more powerful than ordinary ones. Now sold with a two-stroke powerplant, Lightning Charger is also available in a $450 version that generates 800 watts, or about eight amps of AC power. Master Mechanics Well-rehearsed teams of space-walking astronauts performed brilliantly for 11 days to correct the optics and replace flawed components of the Hubble Space Telescope. In a $630 million mission, the space shuttle Endeavour crew restored the $1.6 billion orbiting astronomy lab's performance to within shooting distance of its original design. This year, breathtakingly sharpened images of distant galaxies and confirmation of a black hole's existence are early fruits of the masterful rescue mission. High-Tech Racer The Patriot, Chrysler into a high-performance race car, demonstrates a new approach to advanced research. The car is powered by innovative technology, including a liquefied-natural-gas turbine, flywheel energy storage, and high-amperage electric drive. Building a car for international racing at LeMans imposes deadlines on getting the Patriot running and provides a venue that tests the vehicle in the crucible of competition. Top Quark Now there are six -- six quarks, that is. The top quark, avidly sought since 1977, has almost certainly been found in the energy fire storm at a Fermilab accelerator. Quarks are fundamental particles that comprise nuclear matter: protons and neutrons. The master concept by which physicists picture nature, called the Standard Model, demands that six kinds of quarks exist. Without the top, this view of the universe would crumble. Better Battery AER Energy's Power 220 rechargeable battery pack is the first to use zinc-air technology, which offers roughly three times more energy per ounce than nickel-based cells -- and about one-and-a-half times more than the latest lithium-ion batteries PCs for 15 to 24 hours and also simultaneously power most handheld cellular phones. The battery pack weighs about six pounds; AER is working on smaller versions to fit inside laptop PCs. Long-Play Recorder Norris Communications' palm-size Flashback digital recorder weighs just three ounces -- but its Intel memory cartridges hold an impressive 30 or 60 minutes of high-quality recordings. Flashback has just two buttons: one records, and the other controls the fast and slow forward, stop, and play functions. A planned optional adapter and software will let Flashback's PCMCIA-compatible interface download recordings to a PC. List price for Flashback, which comes with one 30-minute cartridge: $250. Have It Your Way Many luxury cars have memory settings for seat and mirror positions, but the new Lincoln Continental takes that convenience to the next level: Touch a button, and the car automatically adjusts a dozen different settings to your personal preferences. For example, you can program for a low, normal, or high steering effort. The car remembers the set. Dream Laser An affordable laser printer that produces brilliant color pictures to complement its ability to print razor-sharp text has long been a fantasy for millions of PC users. Now, Hewlett-Packard makes that dream a reality with the Color LaserJet, at a list price of $7,295. The breakthrough one-pass, direct-to-drum imaging process renders true-color output at reasonable speeds and affordable prices -- typically six to 30 cents per page. Grand Award Science &; Technology Other Worlds For the first time, a planetary system has been found orbiting a star other than the sun. Alexander Wolszczan, a Pennsylvania State University astronomer, used the giant radio telescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, to observe puzzling variations in the radio waves emitted by a spinning pulsar, a star 1,500 light-years away. His conclusion, now widely accepted, is that "irrefutable evidence" proves the existence of at least three planets around the star. Super Fast, Super Slick Breaking the mold, the Nikon 35Ti's unique camera-top readout has analog display dials and pointers exposure compensation, frame count, time exposure, and self-timer use. (Shutter speed appears in a digital viewfinder display.) The super-fast lens is a Nikkor wide-angle 35mm f/2.8, and the viewfinder's aspheric lens provides maximum brightness and color balance. Price for 35mm not yet set; a 28mm Ti is also available. Special Spectacles Morr-Sight's patented prescription eyeglasses could be produced for as little as $1 a pair, making better vision more affordable for the poor. The company's system includes a mobile eye-care van that dispenses computer-assisted eye exams and standard lenses and frames (photo) that can be assembled for a custom fit on site in minutes. (Photo omitted) With a grant from Hershey, Morr-Sight has brought eye care to more than 4,000 people in Pennsylvania. Air-Quality Control Once limited to European luxury cars, the electrostatically charged air purifier is filtering down to more mainstream vehicles. Freudenburg Nonwoven's units draw cabin air deep inside the filter to prevent clogging of the outer surface area. In the trapped. Now available on the Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique, such filters will likely become commonplace. Meet You At The Computer So far, yet so near. That's the feeling you get with Intel's ProShare Personal Conferencing Video System 200, a desktop videoconferencing package for PCs. While you see the faces of the people you call on your computer screen, you can simultaneously share information and software. The most complete and affordable product of its kind, ProShare includes all needed hardware and software. Cost: $995 to $1,995, depending on phone-company discounts. More, More -- And Less The car that set new standards for luxury sedans five years ago has raised the stakes. The 1995 Lexus LS 400 ($51,200 base) has more power, more head and leg room, and less weight than the model it replaces. Add to that stately new body lines and a zero-to-60 time of less than seven seconds, and you have a vehicle that will no doubt frighten European luxury-car makers -- again. light, researchers at Lockheed Missiles &; Space Co. have discovered a way to reduce the cost of camera, microscope, and telescope lenses dramatically. The first product incorporating the technology is a liquid-lens assembly for a 5.5-inch f/10 refractor telescope. Made by Epoch Instruments, the $2,500 lens assembly is comparable with $4,000 assemblies made from solid materials. Gas Ranges Clean Up Though favored by chefs, gas ranges have had drawbacks: They release combustion by-products (including carbon monoxide), as well as natural gas when a low flame or pilot light blows out. Now the Canadian Gas Research Institute has developed the first gas range with a ceramic cooktop and sealed combustion chamber. A fan draws fresh air from outside into the chamber, then expels combustion by-products. The Institute is working with manufacturers to market the range. Digital Soldier The first digital uniform promises the 21st-century soldier an array of unprecedented capabilities: With a GPS receiver, he'll be able to pinpoint his exact location at all times. With wireless digital communications, with infrared sensors displaying information directly in his eyepiece, he'll spot the enemy before the enemy sees him. The Army plans to produce 4,800 of the Digitized Soldier high-tech uniforms by early next decade. Grand Award Computers &; Electronics Simon Says: Do Everything A hand-held computer inside a cellular phone's body, Simon is a "personal communicator" in the fullest sense of the term It can send and receive voice calls, electronic mail, faxes, and pager messages -- all without wires. Developed primarily by IBM for BellSouth Cellular, Simon sports a bright LCD screen and a card slot for adding new functions. A host of organizing features includes an appointment calendar and address book. List price: $899. Robo-Mower No, that's not a mutant grass-chomping turtle. It's the Weed Eater Robotic Solar Mower. Running on 34 solar cells, the 12.5-pound device snips grass while the sun shines. It operates within the boundaries marked by a thin buried wire; when the mower senses an obstacle, it kind sold in the United States, the Weed Eater mower costs $2,000. A Classic Overachiever The rear-engine air-cooled Porsche 911 is a classic design that nearly defies improvement -- but the 1994 911 nevertheless reaches new heights. A new rear suspension is both compliant and predictable -- a high achievement for any rear-engine car -- while the body is smoothed and modernized. An aggressive, flat-out sports car, Porsche has survived the passage of time to become even better. Base price: $59,995. Bona Fide Black Hole Black holes have been part of space lore for decades. But their existence was unproven until this year, when a research team used images from the improved Hubble Space Telescope to spot a black hole in the Virgo constellation. The scientists measured the speed of a gas disk (right) rotating around an unseen object, and determined that only a black hole could have sufficient mass to keep the gases spinning at such a high rate. Flight Without Fuel Pathfinder, an unpiloted all-wing prototype aircraft 100 feet in span flying solely on electricity from its photo-voltaic cells. Developed by Paul MacCready's AeroVironment **28;500;TOOLONG company, the solar drone will find uses in aerial surveillance, environmental monitoring, and as a communications relay. Adding a fuel-cell energy-storage system should permit Pathfinder's 200-foot successor to fly for months at a time in the rare air that exists above 60,000 feet. 3-D CD CD-ROMs usually store data as a layer of tiny bumps and grooves burned onto a carbon disc. But why be limited to making use of only two dimensions? IBM researchers increase data capacity by a factor of ten with an experimental "multilayer CD" consisting of stacked translucent discs. To read the CD, a laser with a movable lens simply focuses on the appropriate layer. This technology could soon store entire feature-length movies on one CD. Porta-Fax The pop-up acoustic coupler an Smith Corona's Handifax 1000 enables you to send faxes through a handset -- even via your cellular phone. The 13-ounce unit, which can transmit to any standard fax machine, includes features, including a phone book, an automatic phone dialer, an appointment scheduler with calendar, a calculator, and a clock. List price: about $600. No-Fret' Net First there was NCSA Mosaic, shareware (free software) that vastly simplified access to the mammoth Internet with on-screen menus controlled by a mouse. Now the Mosaic XS goes that one better: It can run over the 14.4-kbps bandwidth and higher, making it up to ten times faster than the shareware version. Mosaic XS also lets you work with documents as they're being transferred to your computer and retrieve information from multiple areas on the Internet simultaneously. Mosaic XS should cost around $150. Bright Light, New Laser Until now, you could only get one wavelength of energy for any given combination of semiconductor materials in a laser. But in the experimental quantum-cascade laser developed at AT &T; Bell Labs, the same layered semiconductors can be made to produce a variety of wavelengths simply by varying the thicknesses of the conducting materials. This by conventional ones; the laser could someday become an important tool for monitoring air pollutants. Affordable Luxury At a base price of $25,995 the Mazda Millenia combines luxury and sporting cues in a harmonious, precision package that won't plunder your pocketbook. Artfully designed inside and out, the Millenia is enhanced by good handling and a superior ride. Millenia is also the first passenger car to offer an optional Miller-cycle engine, a supercharged yet nearly inaudible powerplant that improves mileage. Ultimate Cordless Phone? By today's standards, it is. The Extend-a-Phone 9200 cordless from Uniden combines the extra-long range of a 900-megahertz phone with the added security of spread spectrum, a technology that scrambles your call and hops among channels. The $590 unit also includes handy home-office features such as three-way conference calling, two-way intercom, and two separate phone lines. Best of what's new The Year's 100 Greatest Achievements in Science &; Technology (omitted)
In addition to sleeker lines, Chevrolet's redesigned Venture now has a shorter, lower nose that greatly improves the view of the road ahead. // JUDGED SOLELY on image, the minivan comes up short against the upstart, more rugged sport-utility vehicle. But for the road trip, a softball game, the carpool, or any of a long list of domestic chores, minivans remain the ultimate people move and cargo carrier. And tgere's nothing ho-hum about the soccetr mom's best friend, either. Performing a multitude of tasks - and carrying out each at least reasonably well - is nothing to scoff at. Accomplishing these feats of versatility has been a continuing challenge for manufactures, which are faced with designing supensions stiff enough to handle widely varing loads without sacrificing ride comfort, building in enough structure to withstand a crash without stealing precious interior space, and juggling the need for acceleration and fuel economy. For buyers, flexibility and ease of use reign supreme. Comfortable seats with multiple configurations, easy entry and exit, spacious cargo compartments and passenger room measured. Chysler set the standard in 1983 with its steel-bodied, shortnosed front-wheel-drive Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager, and this platform still dominates the market. Variations come and go. Until this year, for example, Ford split its efforts among the reardrive Aerostar and two front-wheeldrive minivans-the short-wheelbase Mercury Villager and the larger Ford Windstar. The demise of the Aerostar at the end of the' 97 model year leaves Ford with the two front-drivers. GM is the most recent domestic manufacturer to emulate Chrysler, shifting from the composite-bodied, front-drive series that it sold through its Olds, Pontiac, and Chevrolet divisions from 1990 to 1996. After carefully studying the competition, the automaker's engineers have outfitted the Chevrolet Venture, Pontiac Trans Sport, and Oldsmobile Silhouette vans with an all-new steel body. GM now offers its new vans in two wheelbase sizes: 112- and 120-inch. For our comparison test, we selected the short-wheelbase Venture and long-wheelbase Trans Sport (with the sporty Montana package) to sample the difference. To spice (introduced last spring), which features a new, wider driver's-side door. Chrysler was represented by its most efficient package: the short-wheelbase Voyager with an upgraded 150-horsepower four-cylinder engine. (The latter is obviously at a power disadvantage in comparison with the V6 engines in the GM and Ford minivans, but other powerplants are available.) Rebuilt from the ground up, the new GM minivans have taken a cue from their counterparts at Ford and Chrysler in abandoning what was GM's most distinctive feature-the steel space frame and all-composite body. The combination had a lackluster stiffness-to-weight ratio; the allsteel structure is quieter and stiffer, vastly improving ride and handling. GM engineers next addressed the biggest single flaw in earlier GM minivans: poor forward visibility. The long hoodlines on previous models earned them the uncomplimentary nickname "dustbusters." The longish fronts also made parallel parking a bit dicey. Later versions boasted a shorter nose, but sensing the van's front edges while parking was still tricky. This latest package is a the windshield wipers are hidden from view. Retained is the most ingenious feature: lightweight, individually removable rear seats. A new optional driver's-side sliding door follows up on Chrysler's successful introduction of this feature; GM has a distinctive, electrically operated passenger's-side slider as well. Photograph The interior of the Plymouth Voyager favors legroom over cargo space in this shortwheelbase version. The longer-wheelbase model has more luggage capacity. Rollers on the seats (below right) make it simple to remove either the rear or middle seats for more cargo room, as well as to push the seats after they are outside the vehicle. Photograph In GM's new minivans, lightweight modular seating folds into several combinations, with the seatbacks doubling as small tables or folding down for a flat, shelf-like storage area, creating the most flexible interior arrangement (above left) in the test group. As shown here in the Chevrolet Venture, cargo netting and bins abound for storing odds and ends. // The Venture has the shortest wheelbase in the length, however, is the 72-inch width. That cuts significantly into cargo and passenger space, especially shoulder room. Even the longwheelbase version of the Venture, the Trans Sport, has less passenger room than the short-wheelbase Voyager. The extra space created by the rectangular upper body of the Venture and Trans Sport compensates somewhat. The modular seats are easy to add or remove. They can be configured into five seating groups, including an eight-passenger setup (on the Trans Sport), and the seatbacks fold into a table-like affair. Though comfortable, the seats-particularly in the rear-offer less lower back support than do Ford's and Chrysler's. And although GM advertises its theater seating, the forward view from the rear seats remains slightly restricted. Upon first impression, the electric door is clever as well as fun. You'll be tempted to smugly impress friends by opening the door with the keyfob hidden in your pocket. And you can avoid getting trampled by the softball team after you open the door. But a process that's ponderously slow compared with manual operation. The 3.4-liter V6 that powers both the Venture and Trans Sport is smooth, accelerates moderately well in comparison with the other test vehicles, and matches the smaller Voyager four-cylinder's fuel economy on the highway. The GM duo's handling is downright sprightly compared with that of previous GM minivans. Feedback from the steering wheel is noticeably lacking, however, detracting a bit from the pleasure of highway driving. Against the new GM lineup, Ford's Windstar stands out as something of a one-man team. Offered as a single model with a 120.7-inch-wheelbase (the short-wheelbase variation is represented by the Mercury Villager), the Windstar offers two V6 engine options: a 3.0-liter 150-hp powerplant and a 3.8-liter 200-hp version. The Windstar is narrower than the Voyager and wider than the GM entries, but its rounded roofline costs interior space up high. The interior layout is simple and efficient, with comfortable seats and good visibility front and rear. The addition of a ceiling-mounted mirror expand the rear cargo area quickly. The new oversize driver's door, however, is only a stopgap substitute for a left-side slider. The door doesn't add much rear-seat access, and when it's opened to its first stopping point, there is less room to climb in or out than with a shorter door. This can be a problem in tight parking spaces. The new left-side sliding doors on the GM and Chrysler vans are superior, particularly if you often use them to stow packages or other cargo in the second row of seats. The highway feel is solid and the steering is precise, marred only by the steering wheel's habit of abruptly snapping back to center as you come out of a slow-speed turn. Our 200-hp test vehicle was the quickest of any in this group. The Windstar's ride is outstanding-cushiest of the lot, but at the expense of considerable body roll. This smoothness shows in the interior as well, such as in the slick operation of the electrical switches. the least power in the group-albeit at the lowest price-ended up showing class in the stretch. The new 150-hp four-cylinder is smooth, more powerful, and unobtrusive, handling at least an unloaded van with aplomb. The high-efficiency engine is worth considering if you frequently drive without cargo. Handling, with a relatively slow steering ratio, is sometimes ponderous, but the highway feel is solid and precise. A superior package and attractive, aerodynamic shape distinguish the Voyager. The seating is nicely contoured, airy, and comfortable. Thanks to the downward slope of the area forward of the instrument panel, the front view is expansive. A low beltline aids visibility to the side and rear. Photograph You can open the optional electric door (left on GM's minivans from afar by pressing a button on the keyfob. The door also can also be activated from the driver's seat or by a button near the door itself. The longwheelbase Pontiac Trans Sport (right) has more cargo room than the short-wheelbase model, now has an expanded driver'sside door for a bit of additional access to the rear seats. Interior features include an overhead console that comes with a fold-down, panoramic rear-view mirror mounted in the ceiling (above), which allows you to see what the kids are doing in the back. That is, if you really want to know. // The aforementioned left-side door set a welcome trend when it was introduced. The trademark rear seat, which can be moved forward and backward, is the easiest full-size rear seat to remove completely. The middle seat is removable as well. The extra width is welcome, although Chrysler manages its edge in passenger volume at the expense of rear cargo room in the short-wheelbase version. That's one reason for the popularity of the stretch. Slightly smaller and slightly more expensive than the other vans in our test group, the Venture and Trans Sport are dramatic additions to GM's minivan fleet. The flexibility provided by the various seating arrays helps these minivans stand out. Handling Chrysler still holds advantages in design and interior room, while Ford has the plushest ride and the tightest interior assembly work. The spread between these minivans has thus narrowed to become more a matter of taste than of superiority. The car-like handling, combined with the best use of interior space and the laundry list of convenience features virtually unmatched by any other vehicle type, may not offset the current infatuation with oversize and overweight sport-utilities. But when logic and practicality count, the minivan more than manages to hold its own. //
"THERE IS NO MORE wonderful moment than when you realize you have just invented something that will win the Nobel prize," says biotechnology pioneer Kary B. Mullis, who was driving down a dark, country road when he suddenly thought of a way to make copies of DNA molecules. His method, called the polymerase chain reaction, has since been used for everything from tracing human evolution to identifying bloodstains at the O.J. Simpson trial. In most cases, though, inventions are born not of a Eureka moment but after years of trial and error, often building on the work of earlier inventors. So it was with Thomas Alva Edison, who perfected the light bulb and the phonograph in his Menlo Park, New Jersey, laboratory (where he kept POPULAR SCIENCE on the shelves). One of America's most prolific inventors, Edison was the first person to be inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio. A few months ago, Mullis and Alfred Nobel (whose invention of dynamite helped fund the prize that is named after we approach the year 2000, we are surrounded by more inventors and inventions than ever before. The U.S. Patents and Trademarks Office received more than 250,000 patent applications in the past year alone. To commemorate a millennium of technological discovery, the editors of POPULAR SCIENCE have chosen the 100 inventions that have had the greatest impact on our lives. We'll be bringing them to you throughout 1999. We begin this month with aerospace inventions that have taken humans beyond the bounds of Earth. In future months, we'll cover inventions in medicine, electronics, transportation, and other fields. We celebrate the inspiration and perspiration that have brought these great ideas to life. 1903 Airplane FOR CENTURIES, humans could only dream of soaring through the air like birds. But today so many people are flying that air traffic controllers are needed to prevent midair collisions. And because of airplanes, our world has become much smaller: We can now travel from one side of the planet to the other in a matter of hours around the turn of the century; most were spectacularly unsuccessful. But on December 17, 1903, brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright achieved the first powered, sustained, and controlled flight of an airplane, at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. To create their Flyer, the brothers built a glider in their Dayton, Ohio, bicycle shop, and then designed an engine and propellers for it. The 12-horsepower motor turned two chains, which drove the twin propellers in opposite directions. On its first flight, the airplane covered 120 feet in 12 seconds. One decade and thousands of flights after his first, Orville wrote: aI would hardly think today of making my first flight on a strange machine in a 27-mile wind, even if I knew that the machine had already been flown and was safe. After these years of experience, I look with amazement upon our audacity in attempting flights. 1981 Space Shuttle NASA'S SPACE SHUTTLE is the world's first reusable spacecraft. It takes off like a rocket (the record is 279 orbits), and then lands on a runway just like an airplane. As of November 1998, five shuttles had flown a total of 93 missions. The shuttle has made it much easier for astronauts to live and work in space. 1939 Helicopter ALTHOUGH Leonardo da Vinci sketched a "whirlybird" in 1483, and the first primitive helicopter flew in 1907, it wasn't until 1939 that Igor I. Sikorsky built the world's first true production helicopter, the VS-300. Because of its ability to take off vertically and hover, the helicopter has proved invaluable for life-saving rescue missions. 1939 Jet Engine LONG-DISTANCE trips are now common, but such globetrotting wouldn't be possible without the jet engine, which produces forward motion by the rearward discharge of a hot gas. Germany's Heinkel HE 178 was the first plane powered by a jet engine; it flew in 1939. Jet planes entered commercial service in the early 1950s. 1957 Satellite THE SOVIET launch of Sputnik 1 (right), the space race. Today, some 500 commercial, military, and research satellites circle our planet. Among their tasks: relaying TV signals, keeping an eye on the weather, and sending spy photos to intelligence agencies. 1609 Optical Telescope NO OTHER TOOL has provided more clues about how our universe began, and how it may end. The telescope has enabled humans to gaze deep into space at stars, planets, comets, and other celestial objects. Galileo's first telescope was a simple tube, but today's instruments include huge ground-based observatories like the Keck Telescope and the Hubble Space Telescope (above). 1971 Interplanetary Probe SINCE THE EARLY 1970s, the United States and Russia have launched a series of small unmanned spacecraft intended to explore other planets. Some of these craft have flown past faraway worlds and sent back pictures that provide clues about our solar system. Other probes, like the Mars Pathfinder and its rover (above), have descended to a planetary surface to take measurements. 1908 Rocket but it was Robert Hutchings Goddard who pioneered modern rocketry, building his first experimental projectiles in 1908. Rockets have proved valuable as weapons, and have made it possible to propel all sorts of objects to high altitudes. It was a multistage rocket that put men on the moon.)
See also related articles on pages 83-86 and 89 of same issueSee also additional image(s) in Cover Image file andTable of Contents of same issue Let's give the Bush administration -- and its successors -- the benefit of the doubt. Let's assume the new space vision proceeds apace and that construction of the International Space Station is completed around 2010. Let's say that NASA and its international partners then continue to operate the station for another seven years, as planned, using it mainly for human physiology experiments that investigate how we might handle extended interplanetary exploration. Meanwhile, of course, we'll have developed a new Crew Exploration Vehicle; heck, for the sake of argument, let's say we've even started dispatching robotic freighters to stock a site near the Moon's south pole for a permanent base. It's 2017, and it's time to turn our attention resolutely toward manned trips to the Moon -- and, beyond, to Mars. It's time (past time, many critics would say) to dump the ISS. What then? elephant into the world's most exclusive hotel. The ISS, after all, isn't an extraordinarily successful, irreplaceably valuable space telescope like the Hubble; you can't just discard it. Even in 13 years, it'll still be blessed with immense **27;3311;TOOLONG capabilities, high-volume data links and extensive collections of scientific instruments -- not to mention that golden attribute of all desirable real estate: location, location, location. This thing is an asset. Yet it's doubtful that NASA, even with pressure from its European and other space partners, will have the stomach or the budget to extend the station's life past its 2017 expiration date. Hence the hotel idea -- sell or lease the ISS to a gazillionaire, perhaps a Paul Allen, a Russian oligarch or a megacorporation with enough capital to finance the project. Citizen stays on the ISS are nothing new, of course. Later this year or early next, an as yet unidentified American physicist will become the third space tourist to pay $20 million not talking about enabling the fantasies of glorified stowaways, however abundantly wealthy. We're talking about converting the station from a sparse research lab into an entertainment center, complete with activities and amenities that are suitable for the discerning traveler and that maximize the touristic potential of weightlessness, and then throwing open the airlock doors to anyone with enough cash to pay for a stay. Even this plan is not wholly original. Proposals for independent space hotels pop up all the time (see "Spin City," opposite), and a dedicated hotel in low Earth orbit, whether it's a retrofitted space station or not, is the obvious extension of the business plan for space-tourism outfits like ISS tour broker Space Adventures, and even for the teams competing for the X Prize, which goes to the first private effort to launch a three-person spacecraft to an altitude of 62.5 miles and repeat the feat within two weeks. But we are the first to commission a drool-worthy, photo-real proof-of-concept depiction of a tourism-optimized space station did the financial and logistical reality check, to see what the bill would be and how the hotelnauts would get there and back. Skeptics might object that the timetable and other assumptions laid out at the beginning of this article (derived from the Bush space plan) are optimistic. They are. But if those assumptions aren't realized, the chorus for unloading the station even earlier will only grow louder. NASA will, sooner or later, having poured in more or less money, endeavor to forfeit its stake in the station. Here, then, is how the hotel scenario would work: A private consortium of some sort -- working in cooperation with the Russian, European and Japanese space agencies -- takes a long-term lease and invests in a major rehab (the Japanese and European research labs will continue to be used for research by a small team of scientists, assisted by inquisitive tourists). The consortium guts many of the existing American and Russian modules and adds a few new ones, including a also includes external screens for advertising, along with dedicated cameras inside and out for shooting space-based reality shows, all of which requires multiple flights on a spacecraft big enough to carry significant payloads to orbit. This brings us to our biggest hurdle: transportation. Today, the only spacecraft capable of transporting both passengers and modules to the ISS is the aging space shuttle, which costs $500 million per launch and is scheduled for decommission by 2010. The 1960s-vintage Russian Soyuz, currently the only other spacecraft that can transport people to the station, can hold either three astronauts or a limited amount of cargo, but not both. But solutions are on the way. Russia recently announced its plan to build a vehicle called Kliper, which evolved from a concept first proposed about 15 years ago. Kliper would be able to carry as many as six people up to the ISS. At the same time, the Chinese are planning more flights of their Shenzhou vehicle, an advanced version of the Soyuz. And then there future generations of the winning X Prize craft will soar high enough to reach low Earth orbit, and it would be silly not to design them to link up to Hotel Alpha, as we have dubbed our ISS resort. Whichever option emerges as the optimal ISS passenger-and-payload ferry will need to have a per-launch cost of around $10 million, or about one-fiftieth that of a space shuttle flight today. This is a back-of-the-envelope projection of annual operating costs: $100 million paid to Russian Mission Control for ground support; $300 million to NASA for ground support, including fabrication of spare parts for maintenance, as necessary; $50 million for additional logistics support; $50 million for supplies, payroll and other miscellaneous expenses. Add the cost of the launches -- approximately 20 per year -- and space hotel expenditures will total $700 million a year. How does the revenue stack up? Figure, conservatively, 60 paying customers at $12 million per week, for a total of $720 million. Then add in profits from station-related advertising and the station's immense power-generation capabilities, the ISS will be able to beam its surplus energy via microwave antennas to satellites in geosynchronous orbit. All told, the station could easily gross around $900 million a year, creating $200 million in annual profits for investors daring enough to transform it. What makes an ISS vacation worth the $12 million price tag? At root is the "because it's there" aspect: a thrilling journey, followed by bragging rights wrapped up in spectacular views. But once you're there, the big attraction will be something no Earthbound destination can provide: sustained weightlessness. Visitors will float through their stays as they gaze out upon the 16 sunrises and sunsets per Earth day. Modules will be reconfigured for microgravity activities, like six-wall handball, or bouncing around inside a giant tubular trampoline, or "eagling," in which visitors strap on wings and fly through a computer-generated environment depicting -- well, whatever they want. Passengers will also have the opportunity to sign up for the to stay attached to either the tram that runs up and down the station's long external truss, or to a robot arm added to the station's exterior. The consortium might even offer a once-per-stay space bungee jump, in which the space-suited guest is belayed out two miles on a tether for several hours of day-night planetary passes with nothing in sight but Earth and the cosmos, the station no bigger than a Matchbox car off in the distance. Even after remodeling, the Hotel Alpha will be better suited to the kind of adventure traveler who dreams of scaling Everest than to the pampered priss accustomed to room service. Guests won't be allowed to bring their own clothes, which could contaminate the sterile environment in the ISS with anything from cat dander to dry-cleaning chemicals. Nor will they be able to pack appliances: An ordinary alarm clock, for example, would fry aboard the ISS, because there are no convection currents to carry away air heated by the clock's electronics. Every appliance built for those fans add up to a noisy environment: 72 decibels on the ISS, about the level you hear on a freeway at 60 mph with the windows down. Another potentially disappointing reality: It will be extremely difficult, and potentially impossible, to earn charter membership in the 250-mile-high club. First, there's the tricky matter of weightless motion; coupling in such an environment might not be possible without a push from a third party (which is how some whales mate), or, at the very least, some well-placed handgrips. But more crucially, it's possible that men will have difficulity maintaining erections in microgravity. Then again, some guests might have a hard time getting in the mood anyway, what with all the barfing going on. Roughly half of all space travelers have experienced some degree of nausea, most likely caused by fluid floating around in the inner ear, which signals the body that it's in free fall. A Japanese journalist whose TV broadcasting company sent him to the throwing up. We're confident that the unique attractions of a space hotel will more than compensate for the inevitable hardships, keeping Hotel Alpha profitable for years to come. This profit motive, let's not forget, is the essential ingredient in our plan. From it will spring the opportunity to transform the ISS from a boondoggle into something that truly captures our Earthbound imaginations. "Looking back on it 20 or 30 years later," says Eric Anderson, president of Space Adventures, "people might say one of the most unexpected yet important outcomes of the ISS was that it became a place for the rest of us to experience space." Dawn Stover is the science editor of this magazine. Visit a guest room in Hotel Alpha: popsci.com/exclusive Illustration
. The first reactor-on-a-barge will bring power to Russia's electricity-starved Arctic. WHILE THE U.S. hems and haws over reviving nuclear energy as a less expensive alternative to oil, Russia has dug back 30 years in our nuclear history to find a solution for some of its own energy woes: the floating nuclear power plant. The Russian nuclear-energy company Rosenergoatom is planning a mobile plant to deliver electricity to hard-to-reach northern territories near the White Sea, where harsh weather makes regular coal and oil fuel deliveries unreliable and expensive. The $200-million floating plant -- slated for construction next year -- could provide relatively inexpensive, reliable electricity to 200,000 people. Although the concept of a waterborne nuke plant might sound outlandish, it isn't new, nor did it originate in Russia. Westinghouse Electric Company considered the idea in the 1970s and built an immense dry-dock facility in Jacksonville, Florida, where plants would be launched and floated north along the Eastern Seaboard, conveniently doling out power to towns in need. Engineers would be able to standardize construction for multiple plants in an offsite factory with increased to its port of call. But ultimately, says retired Westinghouse consultant Richard Orr, energy conservation following the 1973 OPEC oil embargo killed the project. The Russian plan is to mount two reactors on a football-field-size barge, float it to a port, connect power lines to the mainland, and turn on the reactors, providing communities with affordable electricity. The plant will store waste and spent fuel in an onboard facility that workers will empty every 10 to 12 years during regular maintenance overhauls. After 40 years, the normal life span for a nuclear plant, the decommissioned plant would be towed away and replaced with a new one. The reactor and spent fuel would go to a storage facility, but the barge could be recycled. Yet because the safety of the Russian facility is still unknown, the prospect of resurrecting the Westinghouse idea in the White Sea has drawn protest from environmental groups such as Greenpeace and the Norwegian foundation Bellona. One concern is that a boat could ram the plant and spill waste into nasty storm could cut the plant off from the land-based power supply required to run plant operations. Should emergency generators fail, says David Lochbaum, director of the Nuclear Safety Project at the Union of Concerned Scientists, a Chernobyl-like disaster could ensue. In a worst-case scenario, an overheated core could melt through the bottom of the barge and drop into the water, creating a radioactive steam explosion. Such a cloud could do far more damage than the plume of nuclear fallout kicked up by the 1986 explosion of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the former U.S.S.R., Lochbaum notes, because the human body absorbs radioactive water droplets more easily than it does radioactive ash. "Its worst day would be much worse than a land power plant's," he says. Sergey Obozov, acting director for Rosenergoatom, says that reactors at sea have a proven safety record: The facility would be powered by two 60-megawatt KLT-40S reactors adapted from those already in use on three Russian nuclear-powered icebreakers. Yet Cristina Chuen, a Russian California, cautions that subtle performance differences might arise when running the reactor for pure energy generation instead of propulsion, noting that the cooling system remains unproven. Although the technology exists to contain a burning core, Rosenergoatom won't say if the plant -- which was designed a decade ago -- will include the most modern safety measures. With a building permit in hand, Rosenergoatom aims to have the facility afloat in the port city of Severodvinsk in the southeastern White Sea by late 2010 "The Russians have learned a lot about safety from the U.S. Department of Energy, Sweden and Norway -- who probably all wish the Russians would focus on things other than a floating nuclear power plant," says Chuen, who adds that she wishes the planning process were more transparent. "Maybe it will turn out great, but I just hope they did all the research to make sure it's safe." BOX THIS MONTH 38 Grow the greenest home on the block 46 Can fatherhood make you smarter? 48 Mysterious dark floating nuclear power plants at popsci.com/podcast. PULLQUOTE "Its worst day would be much worse than a land power plant's," one scientist says. Reference
Here are two quick-to-build woodworking projects that will come in especially handy this time of year. The portable workbench is great to use as a tool holder and seat for easy, no-kneel, low-level gardening such as weeding or harvesting bush beans. And the canning shelves will hold sparkling jars of your garden's bounty. A PORTABLE WORKBENCH Whether you are a contractor who builds everyday or a banker who fixes around the house on weekends, the portable, easy-to-build tool bench will allow you to tote everything you need for a task, while providing a perfect seat. MATERIAL A light, durable wood like pine or poplar should be used for constructing the bench. You may already have scrap from another project suitable for this one, but if you don't, you will have to purchase only two boards -- one 1" X 6" X 14' board and one 1" X 4" X 6' board; 1-1/4" drywall screws are ideal for holding the bench together; a half-pound will be adequate for the job. Any building supply will be not familiar with buying lumber there is a fact you need to know. Planed (dressed) lumber will be slightly smaller than the measurements it is listed as and unplanned (rough) lumber will run slightly larger. For instance, a 1" X 6" dressed board will actually measure about 3/4" X 5". For this project, that slight difference will not matter. Simply follow the directions provided here and the tool bench will turn out correctly. CUTTING On the 1" X 6" X 14' board, using a square, mark two 24" lengths, two 22" lengths, and four 18" lengths. On the 1" X 4" X 6' board, mark two 24" lengths and two 12" lengths. Cut out these lengths. One corner of each 1" x 6" X 18" board needs to be cut off at a diagonal to create the legs for the bottom of the bench. Choose a corner, measure along one edge 4" from that same corner along the other edge and make a mark Use a straight edge to draw a line connecting these two marks and then cut along this line, removing the corner from the board. The top of the bench will have a hole cut into it as a carrying handle. Along one side of each of the two 1" X 6" X 24" s make a mark in the center. Measure and mark 2-1/2" on either side of the middle mark on the edge of the boards. Then measure in 1" from the edge at the high and low marks and make marks. Ignore the first center mark and use a straightedge to connect the other four marks on each board, making a 1" X 5" rectangle. Cut out these rectangles with a jigsaw or by making multiple 1" -deep saw cuts within the rectangles and knocking: out the small chunks. When put together on top of the bench they will make a 2" X 5" 4" X 12" s and rip each board in half, making four 1" X 2" X 12" strips. ASSEMBLY On a flat surface, lay two of the 1" X 2" X 12" strips you have just ripped. Across these strips lay two of the 1" X 6" X 18" boards with their cutoff corners facing each other. Align one strip along the top edge of both pieces and screw it securely there, using two screws per board. The quickest way to screw the pieces together is using a Phillip's-head screwdriver bit in a variable-speed drill. Next, position the bottom strip 4-1/4" up from the bottom and screw it into place. Repeat this procedure with the other two 1" X 2" X 12" strips and 1" X 6" X 18" end boards. Next take the two 1" X 6" X 22" boards, place them flush against the end boards on top of the strips you just mounted, strips. Place the 1" X 6" X 24" boards on top of the bench, align them flush with the end boards, and screw them into place. Be sure to put the precut handle notches together in the center of the top. Finally, position the two 1" X 4" X 24" boards along the sides, even with the bottom of the 1" X 6" X 22" boards, completing the tool tray, and screw them into place (two screws at each end and three spaced along the bottom). Your tool bench is complete! Gather the tools you need for a particular job in the tray, tote the stool to the site, and you can sit on it and work, stand on it to reach higher places, or use the bench to saw or chisel on. SHOW OFF YOUR COLORFUL CANNED GOODS If you take pride in canning summer produce, then this easy-to-build, inexpensive set of shelves may be just right for you. a large amount of storage while allowing the colorful harvest goods to be shown off. And it makes keeping inventory a snap. The only tools necessary for completing this project are a circular saw, a carpenter's square, a tape measure, a chalk line, a hammer, and a pencil. The materials list is equally straightforward: seven 1" X 6" X 8' boards and 1/2-pound of 12d nails. I approached this project as a rustic country pantry shelf, so I purchased roughcut pine lumber. If you prefer a more refined looking shelf then you may purchase dressed lumber from your local building supply. Pine or poplar should be available just about anywhere and are very good woods for this project, being light, durable, and very easy to work with. Also, you may go as far as sanding and finishing your shelves, but I just kept mine simple and rustic. LAYOUT AND CUTTING Choose two 8' boards for the side pieces. Take one of these boards and a square (90deg) end. If neither end is square, then come down approximately 2" from an end, draw a 90deg line using the square, and cut along this line making a square end. Pull your tape measure from this end and make a small mark at 5' 11". Take the carpenter's square and draw a 90deg line right at the mark you just made. Cut along the line. You should now have one 1" X 6" X 5' 11" board with two square ends. Repeat this process on the other board you chose for a side board so that you have two 1" X 6" X 5' 11" square-ended boards. The next step is basically the same as above, only the cut boards are smaller for shelf use. Choose four 1" X 6" X 8' boards from the remaining pile. Pick a board and try to find a square end. If neither end is square, repeat the above your tape measure from the square end and make a mark at 3' 9" Draw the 90deg line and cut along that line: Now pull your tape measure from the end you just cut on the remaining piece, make a mark at 3' 9", draw a 90deg line, and cut along that line. You should end up with two 1" X 6" X 3' 9" shelf boards with square ends and a little kindling. Repeat this process for the remaining three shelf boards you chose so there are a total of seven 1" X 6" X 3' 9" shelf boards with square ends. Take the length of board (approximately 4' 3") remaining from the last shelf you cut and mark a 45deg line as dose as possible to one end. Measure 14" along the edge of the board from the point where the line is closest to the end of the board and make a small mark. Draw a 45deg line back toward the and the lines taper to about 3". Cut along these lines. Repeat this process once again. These are two upper-corner brackets that both give the shelves stability and provide a place to nail the unit to a wall. Finally, you will need to knock out some simple safety strips that will keep the jars from falling out the front of the shelves in the event they are jostled. The remaining board will be ripped into four 1-1/2" strips. At each end of the board make marks at 1-1/2", 3", and 4-1/2". Stretch the chalk line taut between corresponding marks and then snap lines. If you are working alone, a nail temporarily driven at one end of the board on a mark will provide you the extra hand needed to hold one end of the string. Rip along these lines with a circular saw so that you end up with four 1" X 1-1/2" X 8' strips. Choose a strip and check for a square end; make a. Pull your tape measure from the square end and mark at 3' 11". Make a square line and cut along that line. Pull the tape measure from the cut just made along the remaining piece, mark at 3' 11", draw a line, and cut. Repeat this for the remaining four strips until you have a total of six 1" X 1-1/2" X 3' 11" strips. You now have cut all the pieces necessary to build the shelves. ASSEMBLY Assembly begins by nailing the four pieces together that create the outer rectangular shape of the shelves. Have your hammer and nails ready. On the floor, stand up on edge the top piece (a 1" X 6" X 3' 9") and a side piece (a 1" X 6" X 5' 11"). Bring the top piece along flush to the top of the side piece so that the end grain of the side piece remains exposed and that of the side piece into the top piece using three nails (front, middle, and back). Repeat this procedure with the other side piece and a bottom (another 1" X 6" X 3' 9"). Bring the two pieces together so they make a rectangle -- be sure to align them so that the end grain of the longer side pieces remains exposed and that of the shelf pieces is covered by the sides -- and nail using three nails per connection as described. Use the carpenter's square at each corner of the rectangle to make sure they are square. If the rectangle is not square, gently move the unit until it becomes square and then proceed. Measure down from the bottom of the top shelf along one side and make a small mark at 11-3/4". Repeat this along the other side. Use the square and a pencil to make a 90deg line through these marks by putting the long edge of the square along the floor next to the side board (make aligning with the surface of the side board.) Fit a shelfboard into the rectangle so that its top surface runs exactly between the two lines you have just drawn. Nail the shelf in place. Measure down 10-3/4" from the bottom of the newly installed shelf and repeat the above procedure. It will be 10-3/4" from the bottom of one shelf to the top of the next shelf. Finally, install the safety strips. Measure up 2-1/2" from the top of each shelf along both sides and make small marks. Align the bottoms of the strips between the marks and nail them there using only two nails per strip, one nail per side. Flip the whole unit over so the safety strips are down. Take one of the two remaining braces and position it in a top corner so that its 45deg edges align with the top and side of the shelf unit. Nail it in place with two nails at each end. Repeat this procedure with the other brace on the other top corner wall (with the safety strips facing the room, of course). It will need to be fastened to the wall because, even if the shelving unit is full, the weight of the jars will make them top heavy and prone to falling over. I used one nail through each bracket into the wall. If your wall is Sheetrock you will have to either nail through the braces into studs, or find one of many Sheetrock-fastening gizmos available at most hardware stores. Your canning-jar shelves are complete and ready to fill. It will hold 60 half-gallon mason jars or 90 quarts and you can pile your cookbooks on top between bookends. For simplicity, low cost, efficient use of space, safe storage of jars, and easy food inventory, the mason-jar shelves are a great addition to any pantry.
One of the only noticeable differences between the car of today and the car of my childhood is that these days I can never get the darn window down; there are too many little button controls all over. I don't consider this a real improvement. While today's car is capable of locking it self, turning off its own lights, and cooling its interior, adding on more amenities has only succeeded in making the car more complicated. Adding on amenities hasn't done much for fuel efficiency and overall design either, and there's a whole pack of Americans who'd rather drive an old car than a new one, if for no other reason than they like to keep some things-like rolling down a window or changing the oil-within the realm of human abilities. It's hard to imagine, with the runawaytrain progression of technological advances in computers, electronics, and synthetic materials, how Detroit will be able to continue rolling out new models based on old designs in the 21st century. There is an increasingly popular theory incubating in places like universities foreign) auto manufacturers that the technology of cars is no longer applicable to cars. Let's just imagine Detroit's worst nightmare for a minute: What if a consortium of high-tech computer and electronics manufacturers and leaders from the aerospace and sporting goods industries pooled their intellectual and physical resources to redesign the car from the ground up? What materials would they use, and what structure would they use? What operating systems and fuel system would they use? What kind of car would it be? As it turns out, these questions are no longer hypothetical. Scientists at the Rocky Mountain Institute in Snowmass, Colorado are in the final stages of organizing a consortium of high-tech manufacturers to make real a concept they have developed called "the hypercar." It will be a hybrid electric vehicle, combining the power of a conventional internal combustion engine with an electric motor powered by batteries having four to five times the capacity of today's standard car battery. It will be made of polymer composites rather than steel, in its best design of getting somewhere around 200 MPG in traffic. The design of the car is a flexible one, based solely on what industries decide is most efficient. Rocky Mountain Institute research associate Michael Brylawski sums up the hypercar concept: "The key to the hypercar is it combines these ultrasafe, ultrastrong materials that are light for fuel efficiency with a hybrid electric drive system in a very slippery, aerodynamic package." Rocky Mountain Institute's engineers see a day very soon when owning a car will be a lot like owning a personal computer. You will not buy a new car as often as you might "upgrade" your old car, adding software, doubling your capacity, and so on. This upgradable car made of light materials will be easy to reuse and recycle. The overall environmental benefits will be great but are almost a fringe benefit of a more efficient design. According to the philosophy of the Rocky Mountain Institute, the point is not to make an "eco-car." In addition to developments in technology, recent policy initiatives have created a hospitable climate for the hypercar concept to become a reality. Automakers are now preparing to meet the requirements of President Clinton's Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles, a joint government-industry project that requires the Big Three domestic automakers to design affordable vehicles that get up to 80 MPG by the year 2003. California has also passed a law requiring 10 percent of the vehides in the state to be zero-emissions vehicles by 2003. The hypercar would qualify as zero emissions equivalent in a new category currently being considered by the California Resources Board. (If adopted, the category would only apply to California at this point.) Rocky Mountain Institute hopes that the hypercar demonstration project, built by the consortium, can have an impact on the way the car industry responds to these government edicts. Without mentioning the names of hightech companies who have begun devoting resources to the demonstration hypercar, RMI scientists predict the consortium is on the verge of beginning construction. of the American automobile industry, cars based on the hypercar concept will likely be on the market within 5-10 years. The Rocky Mountain Institute is a notfor-profit think tank near Aspen that develops market-oriented solutions to environmental problems. Their offices, in the highly resource-efficient home of founders Hunter and Amory Lovins, are a working model of sustainable living. With 16-inch thick foam-filled stone masonry walls, double-paned argon gas-filled windows, and a small solar panel system, the Lovins's heating fuel for the entire winter in the snowy, cold, high Rockies is a half a cord of firewood. The place is warm enough to support tropical plants including bananas, grapes, guava, and papaya, and is a working demonstration of hightech devices-from the washing machine to the light bulbs-for sustainable living. While visiting RMI, I sat down with three of the institute's scientists who have been working on the development of the hypercar concept. We held a round table discussion about the barriers to and the possibilities for developing a better car Mike perched atop some -ted, but gorgeous technology. // Michael Brylawski is the research associate for advanced-composites manufacturing economics. David Cramer is the senior research associate for materials and manufacturing. Dr. Jonathan Fox is the senior research associate for emissions, air quality, and transportation. MOTHER EARTH NEWS: What are the barriers that have kept manufacturers from applying new technology to develop more efficient automobiles? CRAMER: Automakers are very conservative, technologically. No automaker is willing to move as fast as technology would allow, due to cultural inhibitions. BRYIAWSI: The reason that you don't see the technological change-even though the technology is available, and can be implemented if energy is put that way-is that the automakers are very used to making a certain type of car that uses steel as its main material, is internal combust-has an internal combustion engine-with gasoline as its fuel. And, they have over seven decades of experience and refinement in this technology so it's very comfortable... very familiar. And the level of refinement is build these cars is so great, that it's very difficult to switch over tomorrow and say: We're going to start building hypercars. There's so much what they call "cultural inertia" in the automakers to prevent that. Photograph // CRAMER: Also, you have to think, in the past 20 years there have been many different consumer desires and policy changes that have incrementally pushed cars a certain way. MEN: Environmental policies? CRAMER: Environmental policies, crash-safety standards, just people wanting more air conditioning-air conditioning is a standard in vehicles-these sorts of amenities. And the way that's been handled is by, if they want an air conditioner, you add air conditioning. But you don't change how the whole, you know, climate control system is. You're still making the same car, but you're just adding an air conditioner. So it's tended to make cars heavier, more expensive, less fuel efficient. FOX: One of these barriers has been the that the higher-end cars, that happen to be less efficient, generally subsidize the lower-end cars. So the Ford Escort may have never made a dollar for Ford-but the bigger cars that they make have a much higher profit margin in them. It essentially subsidizes the more efficient, smaller lighter cars. FOX: Right. So, we think we'll see many different types of players trying to enter the automotive market. MEN: New car companies? FOX: Potentially new car companies. Maybe a consortium or two, some computer manufacturers, and maybe even some traditional automotive manufacturers from foreign countries, that aren't as committed with their resources to the steel-stamping industry that is so prevalent in this country. MEN: I think it's kind of interesting what you said earlier about the car industry not being willing to take a blank slate look at redesigning the car. But the electric vehicle almost is that to too much of an extent. A hybrid is almost an amendment to the regular car, as Your car has batteries and a fuel system just like today's cars. BRYLAWSKI: To the consumer, but not to the producer. I mean, to GM, this is... MEN: This is a totally new manufacturing process? CRAMER Yes, in fact, it's even more of an issue with design. An electric car-it seems like when people design an electric car, they say, "Let's start from a clean sheet and build an electric car." But if you say, "If we start from a clean sheet and just build a car," then what do you get? Well, we think you get a hypercar. BRYLAWSKI: And most electric cars today are basically conventional cars that they've stripped out conventional processes and put in batteries. FOX: Except for the EV- 1, which would be an incredible car if it wasn't carrying around that mass of batteries. MEN: So what happened to this wave of electric vehicles? Now they're switching going to pay $25,000 to buy an electric car? BRYLAWSKI: At least $25,000. FOX: Yeah, that's one of the fundamental problems with electric cars, is that they're more expensive and they don't provide the same functionality as today's cars. So they're relegated to being niche vehicles. And that's one of the fundamental differences between the hypercar concept, if it comes to fruition, is that it can have widespread availability in the market. MEN: Because it's going to be cheaper. FOX: The goal will be to be cheaper but, actually, because it'll be a better car. It'll provide all of the same attributes that users want today and meet the ones they'll want tomorrow-such as improved safety, and amenities, and also range. That's where the electric cars fall off is range, and also subtle environmental problems like battery recycling and disposal. When you have 1,500 pounds of batteries, it's a huge mass that you have to been working correctly. And there's no real experience how well they're going to work. BRYLAWSKI: The main issue with that is that battery vehicles do have emissions: they come from power plants. We call them "elsewhere-emissions vehicles." The emissions that you could get at the tailpipe of a hypercar aggregated could be less than a battery-electric car even under the cleanest scenarios. MEN: How quickly do you think hypercar technology will be incorporated into marketable automobiles? BRYLAWSKI: It depends on what kind of a hypercar you're talking about because they're all different. "Hypercar" is just a concept; it's not a specific technology. So some of the near-term hypercars won't get the 200-mile-per-gallon figures-maybe more towards 80-and they won't have fuel cells which produce virtually no pollution. They may have a gas turbine. These cars could come out, we think, within a decade. FOX: And perhaps within five years. BRYLAWSKI: Because, for example, if you take GM hybrid, you'd have a two-seater hypercar. FOX: Pretty close to a hypercar. MEN: Is the EV-1 made out of light materials? FOX: It is made out of light materials, it's very aerodynamic... MEN: But it costs $34,000. FOX: The average price of a new car today is $22,000. The EV-1 is a niche vehide, two-seater sports car. It's priced about right for its class. MEN: So the first hybrid-electric are not going to be mass-produced, inexpensive cars? FOX: It's unlikely. I mean, it's more likely that they'll be the high-end cars, and it'll diffuse down rapidly because it'll be a simpler, cheaper way to make a batch of cars. BRYLAWSKI: It's generally the standard operating procedure of new technology CRAMER: One important thing about this is, we're not saying that this would be the first hypercar. Because automakers may have their own developments using these technologies. Ford's P2000 comes demonstration project will do is build a hypercar right. FOX: With our vision and with the resources we identified through multiple years of research as being the most viable technologies to go into this platform. And, really, the main focus is to demonstrate manufacturability of hypercars at a low cost. We know we can build one of anything. That's what this country is really good at. CRAMER: But can you make them at all competitive with existing products? MEN: And how far along are you in getting together a consortium for the demonstration project? FOX: We have very interested parties that haven't signed on any dotted lines but have committed resources to the project, such as engineers and materials. And many of these are materials that haven't been in the automotive market traditionally. So these players are very interested in opening up a new market for themselves. MEN: And are there some people who have been in the automotive industry? CRAMER Yes. MEN: Can you say time line for when that might happen? FOX: Our personal goal, in terms of the Hypercar Center, is to have the product finished early enough to have an influence in where the Original Equipment Manufacturers are going with their block programs and their project programs. The PNGV Partnership for the New Generation of Vehicles is trying to determine what are going to be the best technologies to produce an 80-mile-per-gallon car that the government has challenged them to do. FOX: The PNGV deadline is 2003, and they're rolled back one deadline already, so that's not etched in stone. But we'd like to be done far enough ahead of that so that we can have a positive influence in their thinking and the way they're viewing it, because they're getting dose to our line of thinking with this Ford car-the P2000which is essentially an aluminum aerodynamic lightweight vehicle. It's not as light as an advanced composite car could be. BRYLAWSKI: But the other thing about the demonstration vehicle, we're. Because what Jon said is very important-just as there was a lock-in on steel cars and internal-combustion engines, there may be a tendency to lock in the technology for the next generation of vehicles. For example, the materials competition, where you have steel, which is rapidly trying to shed its own mass due to design principles, aluminum, and the polymer industry, all fighting to become the dominant material in the new automobiles. And it may be tempting for automakers to lock into one choice. We emphasize composites, but we have specs. The hypercar, once again, is a concept and if a metal can achieve the safety and mass production requirements that a hypercar would need to be very efficient yet high-performance, all for the better, basically. FOX: Right. We're not wed to any one particular technology or material. MEN: So in the vehicle you designed, you don't name anything too specifically. CRAMER: Right. So sometimes people say, "Well, I... No, no, no, it's a concept; it's an approach to building cars." MEN: One of the main criticisms of designing an auto using light materials is the safety factor. Are we safer in bigger cars? CRAMER: Well, first of all, there's a big misconception there in that we're not talking about small cars; we're talking about light cars. And, you can have a car the size of a Ford Taurus that's half the mass, and you can have it be just as crashworthy because the materials that you'd use, and the way you'd design the car, can absorb energy just as well as the other car. FOX: But the other thing is, what's happening in the market today is this mass armament-type phenomenon, where sport-utility vehicles are becoming more and more popular. MEN: So would you consider this trend an obstacle to this idea? CRAMER: Well, it's also an obstacle to general Ford Expedition, then I might be making myself safer. BRYLAWSKI: But not necessarily. CRAMER: Not necessarily. But I'm also putting everyone else that I might hit, or who might hit me, at a higher risk because I'm putting them at a disadvantage. FOX: And the federal government recently acknowledged this, and there's talk of regulating the weight of sport-utility vehicles. Sport-utilities are heavy cars, but they're not very safe. They roll over very easily, and over half the accidents today that kill people are not collisions; they're single-car accidents. And so when you get these vehicles where people feel safe, they're driving faster than they shouldthey're actually exceeding the limits of the vehicles. So there's the notion of perceived safety, which is what makes you buy a big car, and then there's the actual safety. Does that big car absorb energy in a crash? Many of these big cars are so stiff that if they hit a very occupants. And that's much less safe then hitting it in a light car that's designed to absorb its own energy, so there's a lot of mitigating factors. BRYLAWSKI: We emphasize these technologies in the hypercar concept can be used to make a sport-utility car as well. MEN: A hyper-sports-utility? FOX: Yes, I mean, everything that people like in sport-utility vehicles-not just safety, but durability and ruggedness, and what have you-is part of the actual technology of the hypercars. For example, our electric drive system has very high torque at low speed. The application could be towing capacity or hill climbing. And composite materials are incredibly durable. If people really want big vehicles, you could have hyper-sports-utilities. FOX: And many traditional cars are being made with composites, as energy-absorbing elements, in their bumpers. So we're essentially building that into the car from the ground up, as opposed to adding it on. Photograph // MEN: Let's talk about the inherent good in a remote part of Colorado, I assume you guys do a lot of driving around... CRAMER: No, we bike everywhere. FOX: I own two cars, but 80% of my miles are on bicycle. MEN: There's some irony there, considering your life's work. If you feel you should ride your bike everywhere, wouldn't you also feel we should be working to encourage a less car-oriented society? BRYLAWSKI: We have two main philosophies on that. The first one is that hypercars solve two of the most major transportation-oriented problems, which are air and oil-oil security, the problems we've had in the Middle East, etc. Amory says it's basically like finding an OPEC under Detroit in terms of how much oil we could save if everybody had these technologies. And then, of course, air quality. MEN: But cars aren't the only way to solve those problems. CRAMER: Right. If everyone left their cars at home and weren't driving live in suburbs today, there's no way they can get to work when there's no infrastructure. MEN: So, we have to accept the prevalence of cars? FOX: In the short term. BRYLAWSKI: It isn't a panacea, but it can significantly help those two problems. And then it'll allow us to focus more effort on problems that it doesn't solve, in terms of equity and mobility and congestion. MEN: Another problem with cars is that they are largely responsible for urban sprawl. CRAMER: Well, the thing is, technology changes can occur relatively rapidly. Demographic shifts and changes in land use happen over decades. And if we can, within a decade, get the hypercar on the road and start helping the environment while, concurrently, RMI's Green Development program helps to rethink land-use planning and building design, and to promote resource-efficient living, then we start going to a larger system of transportation. It's a path to sustainability, but it also-when we look at how the United States exports its culture, so that the desires of other countries are really to have automobility-one thing we want is for them to leapfrog the development path that we took. MEN: You mean the Third World? FOX: Third World. China, as an example of a country that has tremendous economic wealth: they have a middle class of 200 million people that can afford to buy cars today. They just don't have' em-but they want them. BRYLAWSKI: The conventional automakers are putting their meat hooksthey're taking their obsolete technologies into these countries, their old tooling, their old technologies. FOX: That is not the path that we want them to go on. And they don't really want it, either. So we're saying: China, why don't you rethink this development path, and go right to a hypercar-based economy? Those are the kinds of low hanging fruit that really could make a transformation. I'm not saying that extent, they're going to be going with cars. And it might actually be with trucks so why not make hypertrucks for moving their agricultural products around China and many other developing countries, where trucking is actually 80% of their fuel consumption for farming and agriculture use. BRYLAWSKI: Some environmentalists have said: Well, if you take away the problems of the cars, you're going to have more cars; you're going to make cars perfect. But, we emphatically think that if you solve some of the problems, you can again focus your attention on other ones like congestion and land-use planning. FOX: Cars may be our enemies, but we see them as the means to getting to a point where we can rethink how we actually use them. MEN: Anything else you'd like to add? CRAMER: Just essentially what we're talking about is a car that if your average person walked into the dealership and saw the hypercar-it could be a hyper-Taurus, it could be a hyper-Suburban'd think it's a better car... whether they care about the environment or not. MEN: I might want one. BRYLAWSKI: We'll try to get you one in ten years. For more information about the Hypercar contact the Rocky Mountain Institute, 1739 Snowmass Creek Rd, Snowmass, CO 816549199. (970) 927-3851. http: //www.rmi.org.
An environmental checklist for new home buyers. Photograph // When we buy a car or a new computer, we often read consumer and specialty magazines to get the background information we need to make an informed decision. But when we buy land and a house-perhaps the most significant purchase that we make in our lives-the average American spends very little time on research. Usually we worry only about affordability or mortgage qualifications, and we don't stop to consider the environment we're buying into. At times, the environmental considerations of buying a home can even be more crucial than the purchase price. Asbestos ceilings and lead paint can lead to less-than -- healthy indoor air quality; and if your property lies in a floodplain or over a sinkhole, then you may be rebuilding sooner than you think. The following checklist will identify some fundamental considerations that you need to be aware of before you buy your next home. If you wait until after the purchase, it may be too late. BACK TO THE LAND FLOODPLAINS While a house near a tranquil river may seem your dream home into a disaster area. Even in areas of the country where streambeds are dry for significant portions of the year, a sudden rain can turn that streambed into a raging river. Do not be fooled by the size of the stream; even small ones can flood and cause considerable damage. The quickest way to find out whether or not land sits in a floodplain is by referencing the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), a government agency that publishes maps called Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). They are available at state environmental agencies, county planning departments, and local, county and university libraries. If you purchase a house in a floodplain, make sure you obtain flood insurance, but as a general rule avoid buying houses in the 100- or 500-year floodplain of rivers or streams. WETLANDS Wetland areas, better known as swamps or bogs, can be covered with water all or only part of the year and should be avoided at all costs. If you come across a notice wet basements along with flooding or settling problems. In addition, since the federal and state governments regulate development in wetlands, it will be difficult-not to mention expensive and time-consuming-to obtain approval for construction. DRAINAGE AND HIGH WATER TABLES The most significant cause of flooding in basements, however, does not come from wetlands or traditional flooding from rivers and streams, but rather from poorly drained runoff or high water tables. Location, slope, vegetation and soils are all determining factors for runoff -- if not property managed, drainage can cause significant problems for homeowners. If you are at the top of a hill, for example, you have far less potential for problems than if you are at the base of a hill. When shopping for land, try to investigate the site while it's raining so you can check out its drainage systems. Thankfilly, drainage problems can often be resolved either by simple measures like cleaning the gutters and downspouts, or by more complex measures such as recontouring the land. But water that flows underground in the water table, which for some parts of the country is a significant seasonal problem. Thawing temperatures and spring rains can raise the level of water in the ground, and this water can seep into basements through cracks and joints. Unlike surface drainage, however, there is little that can be done to mitigate a high water table. Sump pumps can remove minor water table problems, but if it's too high you are usually better off in a house without a basement. STEEP SLOPES Where the grade of the land is greater than 12% to 15% (that is, where the land slopes upward 12 feet or more for every 100 feet of horizontal distance) it will be difficult to build a house, and there is a great likelihood that sod around the house will erode with any water gravitating downhill Steep slopes often result in mud and rockslides; very steep slopes in mountainous areas can result in landslides and avalanches of snow. These inclines have been a major pm in people like to build for the view. In these areas, mudslides are an all too common -- and disastrous -- occurrence. If you decide to build or buy on steep slopes, make sure that the house is either terraced or supported by stilts on concrete footers. Terracing is more expensive, but it provides the best support. Be aware, however, that neither method is without significant risks. Even though you may have a great view of the ocean, you don't want your house to end up in the drink, RADON United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) studies of radon, an odorless, colorless, radioactive gas that is a natural decay product of uranium in the soil, indicate that long-term, chronic exposure to high levels of the gas can cause lung cancer. And since it is found everywhere in varying concentrations, radon generally finds its way into homes through drain open, sump wells, cracks in the foundation floor or through cinder block walls. You can determine radon presence purchase of a house. If the test returns levels above 4 pCi/L (picocuries per liter) you should negotiate for remediation of the problem. Relatively inexpensive techniques such as crack sealing and radon ventilation are effective in solving low to medium radon levels, but high levels may require more expensive action. In this case, you may choose to pass on the house. INSECT AND PESTS Many people tend to forget that humans are not the only inhabitants of the earth; for some reason, we are surprised when insects invade our home. There are thousands of different types of inset in every part of the world, and mosquitoes, ants, spiders, wasps and moths, to name a few, will intrude upon us at will. While wasps and mosquitoes can ruin your picnic, these insects usually don't have the significant impact on your house that carpenter ants, carpenters bees and termites have. To those insects, your wooden house is simply another tree in which to nest and upon which to feed house for termite tunnels, and check any exposed areas for soft or rotted wood. Carpenter ants will usually deposit wood shavings and insect parts near these areas of "spongy wood." Carpenter bees usually leave round holes and tunnels in exposed wood. All can be taken care of by environmentally friendly insecticides, although be aware that many of these pests will return for another visit in the future. INDOOR SAFETY ASBESTOS AND LEAD Until the late 1970s, asbestos was commonly used as an insulation for attics, water- and sewer pipes, and as a material in the manufacture of ceiling tiles, vinyl floor tiles and roof shingles. Since then, scientific evidence has shown that asbestos fibers are a potential carcinogen, particularly for people who are constantly exposed to loose fibers over a prolonged period of time. Asbestos that is in good condition and is not deteriorating should be left alone. Removing it increases the potential for spreading fibers throughout the house and may pose more of a threat than leaving the insulation alone. Even stoves, door gaskets, pipe and attic insulation, wall and ceiling material, vinyl floor tiles and sheet flooring, textured paint, roofing, shingling, siding and appliances. If the material is in poor shape, consider either not buying the house or incorporating the cost of removing the asbestos in the purchase price. Asbestos removal requires a professional contractor who has been trained and, if appropriate, licensed by a state agency. This process is costly and requires extensive preparation. Similarly, if your house was built before 1978, the walls may have been painted with lead paint that can be toxic to adults and children when breathed in or swallowed. According to the EPA and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), children under age 6 who have been exposed to lead can develop learning and behavioral problems. Photograph // The presence of lead paint can be determined only by testing. The Residential Lead -- Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act requires that sellers of houses built before 1978 must disclose known in all 50 states, does not require sellers to repair or correct the problem. If the paint is in good condition, it can probably be painted or wallpapered over. If the house interior has been repainted during the last 15 years, you probably don't have to worry unless all of the paint is peeling or flaking. Improper removal of lead paint can produce paint chips, dust and fumes -- all of which can make you sick. In addition to paint, lead is usually present in the solder that connects the copper water distbution pipes. There are only two ways to deal with lead in this form: Replace all of the pipes with non-leaded soldered joints (a very expensive alternative), or filter your drinking water. Since heat encourages leaching, lead is more of a problem in the hot water supply pipes than the cold water pipes. Therefore, it is best not to use hot water for drinking or cooking. ELECTRO-MAGNETIC FIELDS There has been increasing concern about the potential health risks and distribution lines. Since 1979, scientific studies have suggested a potential relationship between exposure to EMFs and certain cancers. These studies, however, are far from conclusive, but most everyone agrees that the closer you are to the electro-magnetic field, the stronger the effects will be. Unfortunately, there is no consensus about what constitutes a "safe" level of exposure to EMFs. Nevertheless, for some the presence of electric transmission lines has become a legitimate concern. Some buyers, especially those with small children, will refuse the house outright. In response, the real estate market has reacted to concerns about the health risks of EMFs and prices of homes near large transmission lines have dropped dramatically, usually selling at a discount. To some this may mean more house for less, but beware: This discounting will also be around when it's time for you to sell. UNDERGROUND HAZARDS Sinkholes, underground mines, abandoned wells, forgotten oil tanks and hidden pollution are some of the hazards found on properties others may make you think twice before buying. SINKHOLES These areas occur when the surface soil collapses because the underlying soil or geology is either washed or eroded away Fortunately, sinkholes are rare; they usually occur either in areas where the underlying geology is composed of easily erodible material such as limestone or where the underlying soil is exposed to a high water table. Avoid areas where sinkholes have been previously recorded, since it's impossible to predict accurately when another will occur. ABANDONED MINES Tradition has it that when ore was exhausted from a mine, the tunnels were abandoned and no one was left behind to maintain the site. As a result, water seeped into shafts and undermined support timbers, causing them to rot and fall apart. Mine walls also shifted as the subsurface geology changed; in some coal mining areas, abandoned mines even caught fire. As a result, the land that is directly over mines can sink, or even catch fire. ABANDONED WELLS Photograph Check for tunnels or rotten wood when will treat a foundation like just another meal. // Although relatively rare, abandoned wells are discovered on properties from time to time. The principal concern with these is safety because there have been incidents of animals and even small children falling into and becoming trapped in abandoned well shafts. (Who can forget the highly publicized rescue of little Jessica McClure from an abandoned well in Midland, Texas in 199P) To be certain, some states keep records of wells that are dug, but since most of the problem wells are very old, the only sure way to determine if there is one on your property is to walk the property and look for evidence before you purchase. OIL TANKS Underground oil tanks may be present either on the property or in the basement of an older house or a house in a rural area. Older tanks, particularly tanks underground, will rust and leak over time posing not only an economic c but also health conceres by affecting your drinking water supplies. if you find one on determine the age of the tank, since this will be a good indication of the potential for problems. Also, consider moving underground tanks indoor so that you can monitor them for future problems. PESTICIDES AND HERBICIDES If you are building or buying a house on an old farm or near a working farm, there is a potential for pesticide contamination in the soil. Farmers use an array of chemicals to control pests and weeds; these can enter the soil or a well by direct runoff, through local streams, through underground water flows, or as a result of past improper disposal. The only way to know whether your soil or your drinking water is contaminated is to have it tested. As a rule of thumb, it may be best to pass on the purchase of any site that contains significant amounts of toxic materials. WASTEWATER AND WATER SUPPLY There are two types of wastewater services: central sewer collection systems and onsite systems. Central sewer collection does not usually pose a concern. Onsite systems such the other hand, may be more problematic, particularly for older homes. No matter what kind of onsite system is in the ground, you must have it inspected by a professional to determine if it is working properly. old systems like cesspools may need to be replaced with newer systems that meet today's codes. Even working septic systems may require repairs or at least a cleaning. Be aware that a septic system can not dispose all of the items you may put in a toilet that is connected to a central sewer. Also know that you are ultimately responsible for any system failures. Like wastewater services, there are also two types of water supply: central systems and onsite wells. Again, central systems are not usually a concern. All public water supplies are tested regularly for contaminants. Onsite wells, however, may be contaminated and require testing prior to buying the house. Check for the presence of coliform bacteria from septic systems and leaking sanitary sewers. Also, test the well for pH heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, and nitrates/nitrites (chemicals from fertilization or leaking septic systems). Regardless of the type of water supply you may want to buy a filter for your sinks to eliminate taste, odor and trace contaminants. Remember: When it comes to buying a house, you are not alone. Real estate agents, building inspectors, local building officials, and county or local environmental officials are all there to help. Also, talk to neighbors and do as much research as you can-doing your homework and knowing what to look for is your best education when it comes to buying a home. Since you will be living in this house for a long time, you want the experience to be as rewarding and positive as possible. 49 Photograph Leftover pesticides in the soil can seep into groundwater and wells. Sidebar WHERE TO LOOK FOR Sidebar moreinformation Sidebar Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): Flood Insurance Rate Maps. Phone: (800) 358-9616; Web site: www.fema.gov Sidebar U.S. 800) USA-MAPS; Web site: www.mw fws.gov Sidebar U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for information on radon, drinking water, lead, asbestos and wastewater. Phone: (202) 260-4464 Web site: www.epa.gov Sidebar State environmental agencies for information on wastewater, water supply and underground hazards. Sidebar County Cooperative Extension Service for information on pests, pesticides and herbicides. Sidebar County Soil Surveys Produced by the Nab Resources Conservation Service (NRCS, fom the Soil Conservation Service), U.S. Department of Agriculture for infomation on depth to water tables. Author Affiliation Barry Chalofsky has been an environmental planner for more than 26 years. He has written two books, includng The Home and Buyer's Guide to the Environment which is available on MOTHER'S Bookshelf turn to p.76 or call (800) 888-9098). For more information, visit www.erols.com/profed. //
Enjoy a weed-free garden by using these four simple techniques and two special hoes. Photograph // Weeds probably discourage more potential gardeners than any other single problem. "Oh, the garden was overgrown with weeds and we finally gave up" is a common explanation of many frustrated gardeners, but it doesn't need to be that way. Have you ever heard anyone say, "Oh, the living room finally got so dusty that we just stopped using it"? We don't stop enjoying the living room because of dust. We simply vacuum or sweep every so often to keep the room clean. It's the same for your garden: Regularly cleaning your garden by weeding is one of the keys to keeping your crops productive and your enthusiasm strong. Here are the top weed-prevention strategies, plus the two best weeding hoes. First, don't dig the garden. Plowing or deep tilling buries weed seeds, then brings them back up. Let buried seeds stay buried. Most weed seeds germinate only in the top two inches of soil. Do. Each plant can produce an enormous number of seeds. The old saying "One year's seeding means seven years' weeding" holds. The results of this carelessness are cumulative: The more seeds you have, the more weeds you have. But the results of care also are cumulative: If weed plants are removed from the garden and placed in the compost heap before they go to seed, their thousands of seeds won't be added to the garden. No seeds, no weeds. And, as the years progress, fewer and fewer seeds will be left in the garden to germinate. Till twice before you sow. Before you plant a new garden, till the soil shallowly to encourage weed seeds to sprout, then water the area if the soil is dry. The combination of air, moisture and exposure to light will stimulate weed-seed germination. Wait a week after tilling and then hoe or till again to eradicate all the newly germinated weed seedlings before you plant. The more times you seeds you will have lurking in your garden beds. Once the upper-layer weed seeds are exhausted (it takes a number of years, so be patient), very few new weeds will appear unless you bring them up from below or let weeds mature and drop new seeds. Dispatch weeds while they are small. Tiny, newly germinated weeds are the easiest to kill. A sharp hoe drawn shallowly through the soil between the crop rows will quickly dispatch small weeds. Cultivating is the gentle stirring of the soil's surface to uproot newly germinated weeds before they become a problem. That minimum effort yields a maximum benefit, curing the weed problem, while making a tidy garden. And a well-kept garden may motivate you to spend more caretaking time there. Photograph The thin, angled blade of the collineal hoe lets you easily sweep away weeds. // THE PERFECT HOE For cultivating, an effective hoe is sharp; angled for drawing, not chopping; slim, so as not to bulldoze soil onto the vegetable the crop rows without damage. It also must be comfortable and fun to use, or you will find some other way to spend your time. Years ago I could never find such a hoe, so I made my own. Today you can buy this tool, which I call the collineal (which means "in the same straight line") hoe. Various interpretations of this design are sold by a number of garden tool catalogs (see "Special Offer," Page 45). It is designed for skimming in soft, fertile soil rather than for chopping compacted earth. For my collineal hoe, I wanted an efficiently designed tool, not a crude bludgeon. I also wanted a hoe I could use standing upright, to minimize back strain. Since that meant I would be holding it with my thumbs up the handle, as with a broom or leaf rake, I had to find the ideal angle between the blade and the handle for a shallow, skimming action. Seventy degrees turned thin and narrow as possible so that it would cut and skim without gouging and bulldozing. Because the blade was narrow, the cutting edge could line up with the centerline of the hoe handle, ensuring an accurate aim in cutting weeds rather than crops. Finally, I sharpened the blade like a razor, so the cutting edge would be right next to the soil. A sharp hoe allows you to work shallowly and not disturb the roots of the crop plants. Using this collineal hoe with the proper angle and a thin, sharp blade is like dancing with a skilled partner, and just as enjoyable. Hold it in a ballroom-dancing position, with your thumbs upward. Stand comfortably with your back straight. The hoe blade draws effortlessly through the soil of the growing areas. Hoe when weeds are very small, gently cultivating the soil's surface. Go out to the garden on a summer's evening, put a Strauss waltz on the stereo and dance with your hoe. Weed control has never been compaction in your garden should be in the paths. For those areas, a stirrup hoe, with its thin double-edged stirrup blade, will make your life easier. The stirrup is hinged where it attaches to the handle so it swings back and forth slightly, and the hinged action changes the angle of the blade to the soil so that it cuts smoothly, whether you are pushing or pulling. This hoe is held with the thumbs pointing clown the handle so that a lot of power can be applied. It can cut effectively just below the soil's surface or go deeper if you wish. The cutting blade fits nicely in the paths between the beds where your feet have passed. We use this hoe while moving clown the paths backward, working the hinged action of the hoe back and forth in the compacted soil. It neatly cuts off all weeds and leaves a fresh, aerated surface. If you use the collineal and stirrup hoes just a few minutes each time you visit your garden, you crops weed-free and your garden a place you'll enjoy.
Harness the power of flowing water for clean, sustainable home electricity. // Home-scale hydroelectric power systems offer an opportunity for humans to forge an intelligent and sustainable partnership with sunshine, rain and running water. Sometimes dubbed "microhydro," this approach uses low-impact mechanical systems to harness moving water to generate clean, reliable electric power. Unlike the intermittent power from wind or solar systems, hydroelectric power can flow night and day from yearround streams. A hydroelectric system converts the force from flowing water into electricity. You take the kinetic energy of water flowing downhill from a stream or river and direct it onto a wheel in a turbine that converts the rotational energy to electricity. The amount of power produced depends on the volume of water flowing onto the turbine and the vertical distance it falls through the system. Equipment costs range from about $1,000 for the smallest, to $20,000 for a system large enough to power several modern homes. "Many microhydro systems generate 75 to 350 kilowatt hours (kWh) per month," Scott Davis explains in his book, Microhydro the MOTHER EARTH NEWS "Books for Wiser Living" series. Davis is a renewable energy developer with decades of microhydro experience. In fact, it's his life's work, and he's gathered all his knowledge, experience and enthusiasm into this concise, easy-to-understand manual. His book covers the entire subject, from the essentials of site selection to the nitty-gritty of hardware choices and installation. THE BASICS To implement a successful microhydro system, you will need the following basic requirements: * At least 2 gallons pet minute of flowing watet, and a lot of drop; or 2 feet of drop and 500 gallons pet minute of watet flow. * A proper turbine, alternator and shelter from bad weather. * Permission from the relevant authorities, even if the project is entirely on your own land. * A water intake and enough pipeline or "penstock" to divert water to the turbine and return it to the stream. * A transmission line to move the power from the alternator to the point to convert the electricity to an alternating current (AC), and a controller for the electrical system. Photograph Scott Davis, author of Microhydm: Clean Power from Water, has decades of experience with microhydro technology. Beside him a stream flows at about 20 gallons per minute - just the right size for a small microhydro system. // SITE ASSESSMENT If you're lucky enough to have an abundance of flowing water, you may be tempted to envision projects that are larger than what is normally required. Davis stresses that you should plan to produce only the power you need, not the maximum amount possible. If you don't have an obvious microhydro location - but you still have access to running water - you still may be able to set up a system. In its simplest form, the energy potential of flowing water depends on its flow rate (usually measured in gallons per minute) multiplied by the pressure behind that flow (related to the overall distance of water drop, called "head" to assess your microhydro potential before buying any equipment. Accurate site assessment is key because it identifies the total energy potential that's available, and it all begins with a measurement of water-volume flow rates. "Most microhydro systems use between 2 and 1,000 gallons of water per minute," Davis says. "If you have a spring or very small creek, the amount of available water may be the factor that limits your power output." One of the ways to find the total amount of available water, Davis says, is to use the "container method." Find a spot where the potential stream's water enters a culvert and time how long it takes to fill up a container of a known size. The stream's flow in gallons per minute equals the size of the container in gallons divided by the time it takes to fill in seconds, times 60. For example, if a 5-gallon bucket fills up in 10 seconds, the stream flows at 30 gallons per minute (gpm behind that flow, which relates to the amount of vertical drop the water undergoes as it travels through your site. Pressure measurement combines with flow rate to determine the raw energy potential of a location. In turn, this defines the universe of choices for the hardware necessary to produce the electricity you need at wall sockets, light fixtures and appliances. Flow rate multiplied by pressure equals power. You won't get very far in the microhydro adventure before you realize something important: There's more to a good system than just flowing water. You also are dealing with terrestrial conditions, and that's why creating a stream profile is essential and should be the third factor to consider when choosing your optimum site. "A completed stream profile sounds something like this," Davis says. "The first 100 feet drops 20 feet. The second 100 feet are not as steep, and drops 16 feet, and so on." What you're aiming for is an accurate representation of the water flow over to good advantage in your plans. By using a surveyor's transit, a water level or a laser level, you can produce a side-view profile - or cross-section - of the entire stream landscape as water runs from pipeline intake to output port. A stream profile also helps you determine the best location for the waterintake end of the pipe. This is where most of your regular maintenance will happen (cleaning out brush and stream debris, for instance), so you need to choose a spot with easy access, if possible. Also, if the flow rate of your stream is more than a few gal-, lons per minute, you may find J several possible locations for the turbine itself. The stream profile often makes it easier to identify optimal turbine placement, which usually consists of a stable water level, accessibility and water relatively free from debris. Another important consideration is to place the turbine in an area where it won't be affected by freezing water. Photograph Left: A good shelter Top: This Pelton turbine generates power when the jet of water strikes the cupped runner along its circumference. // Left: A good shelter for your machinery will protect it from the environment. Top: This Pelton turbine generates power when the jet of water strikes the cupped runner along its circumference. // Most microhydro installations include a pipeline that diverts water over land down from an area of high elevation, connecting to an enclosed water wheel (that's the turbine) at some lower level. This situation raises key questions: Will a 2-inch-diameter pipe give you the best energy potential in relation to the cost of the material and its flow rate? How does this compare with a 4-inch pipe? Will your energy expectations be met with a 500-foot pipeline, or do you need a 1,000-foot pipe to get more head (water pressure)? How will flow volume, vertical drop and friction in the pipe affect the amount of power generated? All these questions are important because they each can have a tremendous effect variations in pipe size, flow rate and static head yielded a 350-percent output difference across the four options examined. THE HARDWARE Most people who choose hydropower are attracted to the fascinating variety of unusual hardware that makes clean, lowcost electricity. Turbines complete the first part of the energy-conversion process, and in many ways, they're the heart of any hydropower system. Many designs are available, but most include some kind of fanlike wheel on a shaft - set within a metal case that contains and directs water flow to spin the blades. Turbines are designed for both low- and high-pressure applications. High-head impulse turbines are the most versatile - used for situations with heads ranging from 6 to 600 feet - and can generate enough power to sustain most any requirement given the right conditions. The Turgo impulse turbine uses a jet of water to strike the enclosed water wheel at an angle. Because the impulse turbine uses more water, significant power can be generated with less head, which may result in shorter penstocks. The the enclosed water wheel along its circumference, which can be slightly more efficient than the Turgo turbine, Davis says, and is used especially for low-flow, highhead situations. Low-head turbines are meant for heads under 10 or 12 feet. These turbines are ideal candidates to charge batteries a long way from the powerhouse at low expense. The LH-IOOO - made by Energy Systems and Design - will produce power from as little as 2 feet of head, and the Powerpal - made by Asian Phoenix Resources - is a complete small-scale AC system. Constructing your own microhydro system also can be a viable option. Many different methods can be good alternatives to purchasing commercially produced turbines and alternators, but the efficiency and effectiveness of a homemade system depends much on its design. A centrifugal pump can be made into a backward-running Francis turbine (in which water flows through the turbine runner); an induction motor can be used as an alternator; and a crossflow turbine can be fabricated with readily available materials common to Third World ideas on how to make homemade systems. The electrical side of any hydropower facility always includes a device to convert the mechanical energy of a spinning shaft into electrical energy (either a generator for direct current or an alternator for AC). That electrical energy is then sent through a series of components called the "balance of system" equipment, which saves and regulates the electricity once it's generated. But before you tackle the electrical side of hydropower, you need to understand something about the two basic types of electricity: direct current (DC) and AC. DC is the sort of electricity delivered by a battery. Imagine a whole bunch of electrons piled up against one pole of a battery, desperately trying to get to the other pole. When you close the circuit across both poles, energy flows in one direction and can spin a motor or light a bulb in the process. DC electricity is more complicated to generate than AC, and it travels less efficiently. That said, you can it more useful for small hydropower applications that need to build up a stockpile of energy to meet large intermittent loads. AC is the type you get from the grid; just think about it as a series of rising and falling voltage waves. In a typical grid-delivered power system, this riseand-fall cycle happens 60 times a second. Most appliances are designed to run on AC power only. Smaller hydropower systems might include a series of deep-cycle batteries for storing DC energy for intermittent high demand, though having a DC foundation to your system doesn't necessarily rule out the option of AC output, as well. The secret is something called an inverter. "These convert directcurrent battery power (DC) into the kind of alternating current (AC) that we're all familiar with," Davis says. Photograph A Powerpal low-head AC turbine like this one can provide up to 1 kilowatt of power. Water rushes down the manmade aqueduct, then drains into a pipe that's connected to a turbine near the boy are medium to high, you should consider a microhydro system that generates AC power with an alternator right from the start. At that level, you're nearing the point where electrical space heating can be part of your plans. "A 10-kilowatt system that runs in the winter," Davis says, "can provide heat that is the equivalent of burning 12 cords of firewood in a sixmonth heating season." To understand how a microhydro setup operates in real life, it's often useful to look at examples. At the smaller end of the microhydro spectrum, a remote homestead in British Columbia wanted to produce enough electricity to run lights, radio, radiophone and stereo with an existing 1-inch domestic water supply pipe. The residents had doubts they would still have enough water to run their showers and toilets after the conversion, given the water's static pressure only amounted to 65 pounds per square inch (psi). They installed a Harris hydroelectric turbine with a Ford alternator close to the house that produces chose a 500-watt inverter as the electrical subsystem. This system provides for the homestead's lights, radio and stereo, but propane provides other vital home services such as refrigeration and cooking. And at the larger end of the microhydro spectrum, a remote First Nations American Indian community in British Columbia needed a high-output system, but the area's geography challenged the development of a microhydro system. Using an excavator, Davis and his crew dug a usable trench and laid a 4-inchdiameter pipeline, traveling over 900 feet and delivering 350 gpm over 315 feet of vertical head. This hydroelectric system generates a whopping 7,200 kWh per month at a continuous output of 10,000 watts using an 8-inch Pelton turbine wheel, directly driving a brushless 12kilowatt alternator. Microhydro is a clean, sustainable source of power for homesteads in the right location. By considering some of the preceeding requirements, you'll know if it can be a possibility for you. If it is, Davis' book and other resources will give you a more thorough look a sound foundation for further development. To order Microhydro: Clean Power from Water by Scott Davis, see Page 166, or go to www.MotherEarthNews.com. Steve Maxwell lives and gardens with his wife and four children on Mount Island, Ontario. Sidebar Unlike the intermittent power from wind or solar systems, hydroelectric power can flow night and day from year-round streams. Sidebar MOTHER'S Microhydro Archive MOTHER'S Amazin' Archive contains 34 years worth of articles that describe the hard work and creativity that characterize the back-to-the-land lives of MOTHER'S readers. To read these articles, including those on hydroelectric power listed below, go to www.MotherEarthNews.com, click on Archive/Issue Index and search for the issue number and article. June/July 2000, No. 180 "Happy on One Kilowatt" April/May 1994, No. 143 "A New Era in Home-Owner Hydro" January/February 1986, No. 97 "Water Site Assessment" January/February 1985, No. 91 "MOTHER'S Microhydroelectric Plant Revisited" November/December 1982, No. 78 "A Profitable Private Microhydroeleotric Plant" November/December 1980 1977, No. 46 "Harness Hydro Power With A Trompe" March/April 1972, No. 14 "Your Own Water-Power Plant," (courtesy of Popular Science Monthly, 1947) //
As banks and thrifts invent ever more devious ways to raise their fees (see Banking Scorecard in Money's February and May issues), you need to become an educated consumer in order to avoid getting clipped. To help you learn, we offer a quiz that doubles as a cram course in banking facts that can save you money. Choose the best answer to each of the 14 multiple-choice questions below, then turn to page 34 for answers and guidance on how to interpret your score. 1. Which method of calculating your credit-card balance is best for you if you sometimes pay your bill in full and sometimes don't? A. The "average daily balance" method B. The "two cycle" method 2. You need to deposit $9,000 in your bank account by writing a check on your out-of-town money-market fund. What's the quickest way to get the funds to clear? A. Deposit one $9,000 check. B. Deposit two $4,500 checks on successive days. C. It doesn't matter. 3. If you write 120 checks a year, should minimum balance, or an account that charges 50c per check but requires a $500 balance? A. No-fee account B. 50c-per-check account 4. Ads for bank certificates of deposit often warn of a penalty for early withdrawal. How much will you typically pay if you cash out of a one-year CD before it matures? A. One to three months of interest B. One to three months' interest plus 1.5% of principal C. Just 1.5% of principal 5. Where are you likely to find the best rate on a car loan? A. A bank B. A thrift C. A credit union D. A car dealership 6. If you we an ATM at a bank other than your own, that bank can not charge you a fee unless your bank routinely charges for the use of ATMs. A. True B. False 7. Which of the following products sold at banks are covered by federal deposit insurance? A. Annuities B. Money-market funds C. Money-market accounts D. All of the above 8. If your real estate agent finds you a mortgage you can be reasonably sure of getting the best possible terms. A. True B. False 9. If someone uses your lost or stolen ATM card to take cash from your account, how much are you responsible for A. No more than $50, if you tell the bank within two business days of finding the loss B. No more than $500, if you tell the bank within 60 days of getting your statement C. An unlimited amount D. All of the above 1O. You can often get the annual fee on your credit card reduced or eliminated if you have a good credit history. A. True B. False 11. Choose an adjustable-rate mortgage over a fixed-rate one when: A. Interest rates are rising. B. Interest rates are falling. C. You plan to stay put for at least four years. D. You plan to move within four years E. Either A, C or both F. Either B, D or both 12. Even after the S &L; crisis, some banking institutions are still not covered by federal these can hurt your creditworthiness? A. You moved in the past two years. B. You changed jobs in the past two years. C. Your credit report shows a number of recent inquiries. D. You don't currently have any credit cards. E. All of the above 14. As a mortgage holder, you can retire your loan at any time simply by paying the outstanding principal. A. True B. False ANSWERS: 1. A. With the two-cycle average-daily-balance method, used by the Discover card, among others, you incur extra finance charges -- which most cards don't levy -- during any month where you fail to pay all your balance after being fully paid up the month before. For such months, interest accrues from the date of purchase or posting, not from the end of the cycle. 2. B. If you deposit more than $5,000 in a single day from a bank outside your Federal Reserve district, your bank can hold the funds in excess of $5,000 for up to 11 business days within five business days. 3. B. You'll pay $60 in checking fees, but if you park the $2,500 difference in required balances in a five-year CD, you'll earn $127.50 in interest, for a pretax profit of $67.50. 4. A. But if your bank charges a penalty of three months of interest, and you cash out after one month, the other two months' interest will be subtracted from your principal. 5. C. Auto-loan rates at credit unions average as much as two percentage points lower. 6. B. Even if your bank offers free ATMs, you can be hit for up to $2 per shot to use another bank's ATM. 7. C. For guidance, get the free booklet Your Insured Deposits from the FDIC, Office of Consumer Affairs, 550 17th St. N.W., Washington, D.C. 20429. 8. B. Before you agree to use a CLO, which can cost $250 or more, be sure it includes data from the majority of institutions making loans in your area greater your liability, and after 60 days, it is unlimited. 10. A. The card business is so competitive that banks will often drop their fees to keep your business, if you threaten to leave for a no-fee card. 11. F. ARMs are best when rates seem likely to fall or when you plan to move soon. 12. A. Nearly 1% of banks and S &Ls; and about 7% of credit unions still lack such coverage. Check your bank or thrift for the sticker saying it's a member of the FDIC; at credit unions, look for the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) sticker. 13. E. If you are ever denied credit for one of these common reasons, you can often clear up the problem by writing a letter of explanation. 14. B. Some banks charge a prepayment penalty of up to 2% of the outstanding loan balance for retiring a loan within the first three years. SCORING: If you got 11 or more questions right, you either work at 8 to 10 correct, you're a savvy bank customer; with 5 to 7 right, you need a refresher course (your assignment: Read this column for the next six months); with 0 to 4 right better watch your wallet!
A lot of the angry Californians who helped pass Proposition 187 -- to deny costly welfare, health care and public education to undocumented aliens -- probably had someone like Hilda Pacheco in mind when they pulled the lever in November. Pacheco, 32, entered the state illegally from Mexico in 1978, never finished high school and is the single mother of two children. People like her, the argument goes, are draining $2.3 billion a year from California's strained health care, prison and education systems while also filling some of the relatively few jobs available in the state's recessionary economy. What's more, they lack the skills ever to contribute as much as they will take. People like her should go home. Such anti-immigrant sentiments echo well beyond California's borders today. Arizona, California, Florida, New Jersey and Texas are suing the federal government for a collective $14 billion -- the states' estimate of their outlay to support, educate, hospitalize and imprison illegal aliens. In Washington, the Commission on Immigration Reform, headed by former Democratic Rep. of legal workers, effective barring jobs from the estimated 200,000 to 300,000 undocumented immigrants each year. And the new Republican majority in Congress has gone further, threatening to cut off welfare benefits even for legal immigrants, except for refugees and those over age 75. Before you reach your own conclusion about these initiatives, you may want to learn more about people like Hilda Pacheco. What you discover may not conform to the talk radio image of immigrants as leeches. Rather than being a drag on the economy, Pacheco -- like most immigrants -- is making it in America. She has never been on welfare, has attained legal status and has elevated herself from a subminimum-wage job at a hamburger stand 16 years ago to her current $50,000-a-year managerial position at a worker-training firm. "I'm sure that illegals pay more taxes than they get credit for," Pacheco says. With immigrants entering the U.S. at a rate of 1 million a year, foreign-born residents -- legal and illegal -- now represent 8.5% of the in 1970. And in California, where fully 40% of recent immigrants settle, 22% of the population was born outside the U.S. Still, foreign-born residents today make up a much smaller portion of the U.S. population than they did following the great wave of immigration at the start of the century, when foreign-born residents peaked at 15%. People who criticize today's immigrants, however, contend that as a whole, the current newcomers are fundamentally different from the 13 million Eastern and Southern Europeans who immigrated to the U.S. in the first half of this century. They surely are different in at least one sense: Just 38% of today's arrivals are white, compared with 88% of those who came before 1960. Critics also argue that our high-tech economy now demands brains, not brawn, which means poorly educated and unsophisticated immigrants have little hope of following their predecessors into the middle class. If you look at the research on immigrants, however, you'll find that much of the pessimism is unwarranted. Contrary to today's immigrants -- legal and illegal -- are doing well, or at least striving to pave the way for their children to live better lives. Figures from the Census Bureau reveal that immigrants who arrived in the U.S. before 1980 actually boast higher average household incomes ($40,900) than all native-born Americans ($37,300). * Few immigrants come here to get on welfare. In reality, working-age, nonrefugee immigrants are less likely than their native-born counterparts to be on the dole. * Immigrant children aren't gobbling up precious educational dollars, either. In fact, only 4% of the $227 billion we spend to educate our children is spent educating legal immigrant children and just 2% is spent on the estimated 648,000 kids who are here illegally. * Immigrants are not long-term drains on our economy. Yes, the estimated 3.8 million illegal immigrants cost us about $2 billion a year, chiefly because many work in low-wage jobs and often don't pay income taxes. But over time, immigrants become productive. As a a year more in taxes than they consume in government services, says the Urban Institute. Like yesterday's immigrants, the newcomers choose America because it offers a chance to prosper. Jeffrey S. Passel, the Urban Institute's director of immigration research and policy, is optimistic about their prospects. "The very act of pulling up stakes and moving to a foreign country indicates that you have initiative and want to better yourself," he says. The successes of today's immigrants hold lessons for us all, whether our ancestors came here on the Mayflower, in slave ships, on a turn-of-the-century steamer or on a jetliner. Jobs, not welfare Immigration's foes are fond of pointing out that 9% of immigrant households collect cash welfare benefits, compared with only 7% of households headed by native-born Americans. But that single statistic paints a misleading picture. Welfare use is high almost exclusively among legal refugees from war-torn or Communist countries, including Cambodia (50% of all households), Laos (46%), Vietnam) and Cuba (16%). Unlike other immigrants, these favored refugees are immediately entitled to public assistance. As a result, 16% of the refugees, in contrast to only 3% of other immigrants who came here during the 1980s, get public aid. The notion that illegal immigrants come to the U.S. to obtain welfare benefits is a myth. Illegals already are barred from all public assistance except for emergency medical care under Medicaid and the women, infants and children (WIC) nutrition program. Further, even a legal immigrant who goes on the dole during his first five years in the U.S. risks deportation. Though few actually get the boot, the law still acts as a deterrent because an immigrant on welfare would have difficulty getting the approvals necessary to sponsor relatives for residency in the U.S., which is a prime goal for many immigrants. Thirty-two-year-old Iraji Khiar reflects the prevalent imminent attitude toward welfare. He fled war-torn Ethiopia in 1977 and spent the next 10 years with family friends in the Sudan before come a few years earlier. But when Khiar arrived in San Diego in 1987, he couldn't locate his relative, and in order to survive, he accepted the Catholic Church's help in signing him up for welfare -- for all of four weeks. At that point, Khiar refused further aid, insisting that he wanted to earn his keep "with my own sweat." He began working as a high school janitor at $7.75 an hour and attending classes toward an associate's degree in business administration from San Diego City College. He later went into the food business with another cousin and her brother. Today the trio typically work 141 hours a week at the Maryam Sambussa Factory, which bakes savory East African pastries, and the Sphinx International Restaurant, which serves up a multiethnic stew of East African and African-American foods. The Sphinx features African and American music -- when it's not karaoke night. The dream is alive Academics have found that the longer immigrants are here, the more likely they: a home and their own business. For example, among immigrants who have lived here five to nine years, 44% own their own homes. That figure rises to 55% after at least 10 years. Some scholars believe that immigrants eventually pull ahead of natives in the income race because their work habits aren't constricted by our notions of the typical eight-hour workday. Further, a willingness to strike. out on their own has allowed many immigrants to earn more money sooner than they would have in the corporate world, given their often limited command of English. Overall, the same portion (7%) of immigrants as native-born Americans are self-employed, and both groups of entrepreneurs earn, on average, about $30,000 a year. Yet for some ethnic groups, self-employment rates are significantly higher, particularly for Koreans (18%) and Iranians (12%). Immigrants also are well represented in highly skilled professional and technical jobs. Two of every 10 U.S. physicians are foreign-born, for example, as is one in immigrants who arrived here after 1980 will never do as well as natives because they're more likely than their predecessors to have come from Third World nations. Only time will tell whether recent immigrants' median household income of $31,100 will rise. Still, a closer look at the facts reveals that these newcomers aren't as disadvantaged as they first appear. Explains University of Texas sociologist Frank D. Bean: "To say that today's immigrants are of lower quality than their predecessors puts an unfair onus on them. They actually have more education than immigrants who came here 20 years ago." Indeed, between 1970 and 1990, the percentage of immigrants with college degrees climbed from 19% to 27%. Meanwhile, the portion of immigrants who dropped out of high school fell to 37% from 48%. (By comparison, 15% of native-born Americans are high school dropouts and 27% are college graduates.) Nearly half (47%) of African immigrants hold college degrees. Even if you assume that most immigrants who lack college market, it's wrong to presume that they won't become taxpayers or that their children will get stuck in low-wage jobs. As Michigan State sociologist Ruben G. Rumbaut, an expert on recent immigrants, reminds us: "At the turn of the century, many people argued that the U.S. was attracting immigrants who had little education and few job skills. But the fact that you came here as a peasant didn't mean that your children would forever be part of the unwashed underclass." Immigrant kids: Moving to the head of the class The widely held belief that most immigrant kids demand to be taught in their native languages indefinitely is also dead wrong, as is the notion that we are spending a ton of money on bilingual education. Federal spending on bilingual education, adjusted for inflation, actually fell 48% during the 1980s, despite a 50% increase in the number of public school children with limited proficiency in English. In addition, studies show that English is the language of choice for the children experience of the Rev. Nancy C. Moore, senior pastor of Faith United Presbyterian Church in Los Angeles' predominantly Hispanic Highland Park neighborhood, is instructive. Since most of the 72 children who signed up for Sunday School two years ago were Hispanic, Mrs. Moore decided to assign two teachers to each classroom, one who spoke English, another who spoke Spanish. She dropped the plan, however, when she discovered that 69 of the kids already knew English and that the three who didn't wanted to be taught in their adopted language, not their parents' tongue. There's also plenty of evidence that immigrants' children are performing well academically, despite poverty, poorly educated parents and discrimination -- problems often associated with underachievement in native-born Americans. Even children who missed years of school while detained in refugee camps abroad do amazingly well. In one study, for example, University of Michigan researchers tracked 536 Vietnamese, Laotian and Chinese-Vietnamese children who attended public schools in low-income sections of Boston, Chicago, Houston,. Most were B students, more than a quarter regularly got A's, and only 4% had grade point averages at or below C. They also did better than average on a standardized achievement test; in math, an impressive 27% ranked in the top 10% nationwide. Why do these kids remind us of Horatio Alger rather than Bart Simpson? Because their parents preached a mantra that has served immigrants for generations: Control your destiny through education. The kids, in turn, relish the chance to learn; in their homelands, education is generally reserved for the wealthy. As a result, families gather around their kitchen tables on weeknights, with older children expected to assist younger siblings. The University of Michigan researchers found that, on average, immigrant grade school students studied two hours and five minutes a night, while high school kids hit the books three hours and 10 minutes. The typical American junior or senior high school student studies only an hour and a half per day. Unfortunately, other researchers it is often because of overassimilation into American culture. In other words, the longer they live here, the more television they watch and the less homework they do -- results that reflect more poorly on us than them. Another myth: Success is limited to Asian kids. A study of Salvadoran, Guatemalan and Nicaraguan illegals who attended overcrowded, violence-plagued schools in the San Francisco area found that they were the academic stars of otherwise dismal institutions. Although two-thirds of the 50 Central American students surveyed worked 15 to 30 hours a week to supplement their families' income, half made the honor roll. The most astonishing achievements, however, belong to the Hmong, people who were subsistence farmers and CIA operatives in the mountains of northern Laos during the Vietnam War. Many adult Hmong are not literate even in their native language, and a disturbing three-quarters of their households are on welfare. Yet studies of Hmong schoolkids in San Diego and St. Paul conducted during the past four years reveal that they earn better grades by one San Diego teenager he interviewed a few years ago. The girl's mother had died giving birth to her eighth child; her father remarried and had six more children. In the U.S., the family of 16, joined by the girl's maternal grandparents, squeezed into two apartments. The girl was responsible for keeping house, so she usually couldn't start studying until midnight. Yet she scored 1216 on the SAT (the national average is 902). Muses Rumbaut: "Whenever I think of that girl, I know it's unwise to make pronouncements about the future success of immigrants' children simply by looking at aggregate census data on recent immigrants' education and income." Yet despite immigrant accomplishments, some Americans seem determined to keep whispering: No matter what, they'll never be real Americans. They'll keep their strange customs, congregate in ethnic enclaves, and as their numbers and economic well-being increase, they will demand political power. And if they do, well,, ragtag ethnic tribes that landed on our shores three or four generations ago and still insist on clinging to such rituals as polka dancing, playing boccie and marching in the St. Patrick's Day parade. Aren't we better off for having let them in?
Hot prospects range from tech consulting to home remodeling, and several can be launched from your home for only a few thousand dollars in seed money. // IF YOU'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT STARTING YOUR own business,' 98 will be a good year to follow through. The economy is expected to remain strong with interest rates relatively low What's more, two-thirds of owners of small and mid-size companies-those with fewer than 500 employees-expect their revenues and profits to increase during the next 12 months, according to a recent report by Arthur Andersen's small business advisory arm, the Enterprise Group. To join these upbeat entrepreneurs, you must first identify a growing market with an unmet demand-say, businesses that need tech consultants and work-force trainers, or the swelling ranks of the elderly who require all sorts of services. To help you find these sweet spots, MONEY canvassed small business owners, consultants and trend watchers. All the ventures in the seven categories described below can be launched for under $20,000 and some for just a few grand. Web retailing. Commerce on billion in annual sales to more than $220 billion in 2001, according to International Data Corp., a market research firm in Framingham, Mass. To capitalize on this boom, go online with a product that people like to order by phone or are actively buying from catalogues. You'll need experience with interactive technology and a flair for marketing. That nicely describes Ken Burke, 31 (below), who has an M.B.A. from the University of Southern California. He saw that "businesses wanted to get their products and services on the Web." So, with just $10,000 in seed capital, Burke founded Multimedia Live in 1995 to create "cybershopping malls" where anyone with a computer and a modem can buy anything from floral bouquets to auto parts. His largest site, Choicemall.com, is home to some 1,600 stores and serves 500,000 visitors a month. Burke says his company, based in Novato, Calif., will net a profit of $1.5 million in 1997. Getting started: The Association for source for industry information-but annual dues run at least $750. The more specialized National Association of Webmasters (888-564-6629; www.naw.org) can put you in touch with Web pros in your field of interest for a $95 membership fee. Technology consulting. Businesses of every size today must constantly upgrade their technology to stay competitive. According to the Arthur Andersen study, 70% of small and mid-size firms improved their computer systems in 1997, and 10% plan to add a Website in 1998. If you're tech-savvy and entrepreneurial, opportunities abound in Website and database development, preparing computers for the year 2000, and general PC doctoring in the neighborhood. Photograph Shoppers reach California entrepreneur Ken Burke's on-theWeb "cybermalls" via computer and modem, rather than by car. // Jim English, 48, started English Computer Consulting with just $9,000 in capital in July 1996, customizing off-theshelf database software for advertising and publishing companies in New York City He says his four-employee firm will net $150,000 in 1997 and adds that there's the Getting started: The Independent Computer Consultants Association (800774-4222; www.icca.org) offers good networking opportunities in return for annual dues of $175 to $275. CompuServe members can post queries on ICCA's forum GO CONSULT. Financial and retirement planning. More and more Americans are hiring experts to help manage their finances. Access Research, a retirement services consultancy based in Windsor, Conn., surveyed 750 workers across the U.S. in 1996 and found that 20% would pay for aid in sorting out their 401(k) retirement savings options. No wonder 86% of certified financial planners expect their client rosters to swell in the next five years, according to a survey by the National Endowment for Financial Education. Jill Gianola, 46, a former economist and small business consultant, completed a course from the College for Financial Planning to become a feeonly certified planner in 1994. Gianola today helps more than 60 middleincome clients create budgets, retirement plans and college-financing strategies. She expects to bring in about $70,000 in 1997. Getting started: Call the College a certified financial planner. Small business consulting. Over the past 10 years, employment at U.S. companies with fewer than 100 workers increased by 2 million, even as it dropped by 10 million at the 1,000 largest firms. "But many small business start-ups need expert advice to get up and running," says Gene Fairbrother of the National Association for the Self-Employed in Washington, D.C. To succeed, you should have a background in business and experience with start-ups. Four years ago in north Dallas, Charles Vanstory, 48, launched Vanco Consulting to help small firms fine-tune their strategies. He boasted 20 years of experience running successful start-ups in the restaurant and oil industries. Vanstory operates from a home office in a converted utility room, where his setup cost was just $1,000, yet he expects to earn about $80,000 in 1997. Getting started: Tap into the Small Business Administration's database (www. sba.gov), or phone their office of economic research at 202-205-6530 for a report on small businesses in your the ranks of Americans over 65 will swell by 15% to 39 million. So cater to the needs of the elderly, and you'll have a rapidly growing customer base. Greg Gunderson, 37, created Gentle Transitions, which helps seniors move into new dwellings, in May 1994. The former buyer for Home Depot started his business from his Manhattan Beach, Calif. home with a mere $5,000. He now leases space for 15 contingent employees servicing clients in the Los Angeles area and expects revenues of $140,000 in 1997 and $200,000 in 1998. (He won't discuss his profits.) Gunderson, whose mother started a similar business in 1990 in Minneapolis, says the need for his service "exists everywhere" and would like to expand his business nationwide. Getting started: For demographic information on the senior population in your area, try the American Association of Retired Persons' Website (www.aarp. org) or get in touch with the Census Bureau (301-457-2422; www.census.gov). Home remodeling. Trend prognosticator Americans will be spending more time at home than ever before both for pleasure and business. (See page 27 for an interview with Celente about his book, Trends 2000, available in paperback from Warner Books for $14.99.) Home offices are now in 43% of households, according to the International Data Corp., and many people are upgrading rather than moving to a new home. Home remodeling sales reached $115 billion in 1996 and will grow to $180 billion by 2005, reports the Remodelors Council of the National Association of Home Builders in Washington, D.C. The NAHB estimates that by 2010, spending on remodeling will surpass spending on new homes. You can profit from this trend if you are, say, a skilled carpenter or plumber ready for the added responsibilities of being a contractor. Interior designers and architects are also likely candidates. Hot niches to pursue: home-office additions, combining kitchens and family rooms, and adapting homes for the elderly and disabled. Getting started: The Remodelors Council (202-822-0216; in touch with any of their 150 local chapters. Work-force training. Julian Lange, a professor of entrepreneurship at Babson College in Wellesley, Mass., observes that to remain competitive, companies must constantly train and retrain their workers. And about half of the $55 billion that companies spend each year on employee education-from new technology to evolving management systems-now flows to outside firms, according to the American Society for Training and Development (ASTD), an association of training professionals. To start your own training business, you need expertise in an area like computers, human resources or organizational psychology Teaching experience is a plus. Robert Hayles, a former vice president of human resources and diversity at Pillsbury, the prepared-foods conglomerate, started Effectiveness/Diversity in 1995 to help firms across the country achieve higher performance and greater diversity by race and gender in their work forces. Working from his home office in Arden Hills, Minn., Hayles, after two years and about $15,000 in seed money, says he is earning a six-figure income- corporate job. Getting started: The ASTD (800-628-2783; www.astd.org; $150 yearly dues) has 68,000 members worldwide and can connect you with other training businesses.
. Jennifer and Darryl Hazelwood lost their house and most of their personal belongings to Hurricane Katrina. One year and six moves later, they're finally ready to put down roots and rebuild their lives. JENNIFER AND DARRYL HAZELWOOD walk slowly across the weed-infested lawn of what was once their dream house. She has not stepped inside since it was swallowed by the floodwaters of Hurricane Katrina nearly a year ago. What they see is a nightmare. Their couch seems to float in the air, one end perched on a kitchen counter, the other incongruously held aloft by a baby stroller. The TV cabinet has a large hole in the back where their big-screen model smashed through. The stench of mold is strong, and reminders of their lost life are scattered everywhere -- dolls, books, pillows, a plastic cup here, a shattered table there. There is no comfort in knowing that all the single-story homes in their middle-class neighborhood in New Orleans met the same fate thanks to a breach in the nearby London Avenue canal. The floodwaters turned their home into crazily for nearly a month until the area could be drained. "See this line here?" Darryl says, pointing to a spot a few inches below the ceiling. "That's how high the water was." How does a family recover from such devastation -- physically, emotionally and financially? That's the question Jennifer, Darryl and tens of thousands of other Katrina refugees are still struggling with. Since evacuating to Houston the day before the storm hit, the Hazelwoods have moved six times, most recently sharing a two-bedroom apartment with Jennifer's brother Brad and his wife in nearby Mandeville, La. The prolonged crisis has given daughter Emily, 21 months, nightmares and has upset 5-month-old Dylan's food and sleep routines. It has strained Darryl and Jennifer's marriage and sent her into periods of depression. "Yeah," she sighs during a tour of Brad's spartan guest room, where the four of them sleep, "this is getting old." Still, the Hazelwoods,. They have gotten most of the insurance money they are owed. Jennifer is a public school teacher and co-owner of a successful ballet school. Darryl's construction job earns him plenty of overtime pay. And they recently took a huge step toward returning to their beloved city by putting in the winning bid on a two-family home in Lakeview, an upscale neighborhood they'd always coveted but could never afford. Gambling that New Orleans will come back to life, however, is riskier than a blackjack game at Harrah's. The Hazelwoods' new neighborhood was as ravaged by Katrina as their old one, and the new house will need a year's worth of renovations before it is habitable. Their plan to finance the new house is dicey too. And they've just been told by brother Brad's landlord that they'll have to move again -- six people in one apartment apparently violates fire-code regulations. Meanwhile, somewhere off the Gulf Coast, new hurricanes are stirring. "The future," Darryl drawls at this moment. The Flight from Katrina Jennifer and Darryl met through friends five years ago at a karaoke bar on Bourbon Street. They are complete opposites, he says. He dropped out of high school to join the military; she's a college grad who loves ballet. It didn't seem to matter. They married in 2003, and Darryl moved into the modest house Jennifer owned near Lakeview, where most of her family lived. When Katrina began sweeping across the Gulf Coast in August of 2005, Emily was nine months old and Jennifer had just learned that she was pregnant again. The couple were reluctant to evacuate; they'd spent 13 hours in gridlocked traffic the previous summer fleeing Hurricane Ivan, which turned out to be a dud. But on Sunday morning, they woke up to reports that Katrina had grown into a Category 5 monster and knew they had to go. Fast. They grabbed clothes to last a few days, wedding pictures and a bag marked "vital documents." After driving all day and most of the night in bumper-to-bumper traffic, they ended up at a Marriott in Houston. They watched the collapse of the levees back home on the hotel TV. Darryl's mother called to say that she saw their house on the news -- but only the peak of the roof. The rest of it had drowned in eight feet of water. They moved three more times before settling into a two-bedroom rental outside New Orleans. (They moved in with Brad when that lease was up.) Dylan was born in April, and they were thankful he didn't have to come home to a FEMA trailer. But the gratitude wore thin as the magnitude of their losses began to sink in: their beautiful home, Jennifer's ballet school, their neighborhood full of family and friends. "After the baby was born," she says, "everything just hit me at once." The children became increasingly fractious, and the relationship between Darryl and Jennifer grew strained kind of house to build. "The storm seemed to either bring people closer together," she says, "or tear them apart." Turning a Corner One thing the couple didn't argue about was money. While New Orleanians from cabdrivers to Ph.D.s suddenly found themselves unemployed, the Hazelwoods were not among them. Jennifer did lose $800 a month in income when her ballet school was destroyed. And her salary dropped from $38,000 to $24,700 when she went on maternity leave in February. But her loss in earnings has been partially offset by a rise in Darryl's: As a handyman for a construction firm, he is busier than ever, doing grisly jobs like removing drowned animals from bank lobbies and shoveling out mounds of mud. He's on track to make $40,000 this year. Not much federal disaster assistance was available for middle-class couples like the Hazelwoods. They received $4,358 from FEMA for emergency relief and rental assistance, and that was it. They counted instead on insurance to help them -- They got their first two checks, totaling $50,000, six weeks after the storm. But the next payment, two checks totaling $62,000, took four months to arrive and was $20,000 less than expected. Darryl went back to the house and painstakingly documented each item; seven months later, the final $20,655 was approved. They're still waiting for the check. But the Hazelwoods aren't complaining. Including a few other payouts from their insurance policies, the amount they've collected so far is more than $140,000 -- enough to pay off the $109,000 mortgage on their old house, erase $15,000 in credit-card debt and set aside $5,500 in a savings account. The rest went toward clothes, some furniture and dining out, especially on comfort food (creating what locals call their Katrina weight). Their food bills alone now run nearly $1,000 a month. A Place to Call Home What weighs most on the Hazelwoods is no longer having a home of their own. They can't go back to their old house tired of bouncing from place to place. They want to put Katrina behind them. But a year later, they still have nowhere to call home. They know where they want to go. After months of looking and debating, the Hazelwoods have finally found their new dream house, a 20-year-old two-family brick colonial in Lakeview. It has a second floor to store precious belongings in case of flood and is built three feet higher than older buildings. Best of all, they'll be just 10 blocks away from Jennifer's parents. Under ordinary circumstances, the Hazelwoods couldn't afford Lakeview. But these are extraordinary times, and their new neighborhood is a blighted wilderness of rats, broken glass, cracked roads and abandoned cars. The first floor of the new house has been gutted and must be completely redone before they can move in, which is why their bid of $198,000, for a place worth nearly $400,000 before Katrina, was accepted. Even so, financing the purchase is tough. The Hazelwoods gotten preliminary approval for a mortgage covering the entire price, plus another $80,000 loan to pay for the renovations. Luckily, their local lender has given them very favorable terms in a special financing arrangement created to help revive the area. Their 30-year mortgage has a fixed rate of 6.75%, and they're required to pay no principal and only 2% interest until the renovation is completed or for up to one year. The renovation loan is at 2% as well. The real question is what will happen once the house is ready and their payments skyrocket from $400 a month to $2,355 -- more than 50% of their take-home pay. The Hazelwoods are counting on $900 a month from renting out half the house, plus $650 in income from the ballet school, which just reopened in a new location. But that assumes they can complete the renovations in one year in a city where demand for contractors far outstrips supply. And that the rental market remains strong. And that Jennifer's ballet school thrives. The Advice a financial planner in Covington, La. Gadkowski works pro bono for hurricane victims (fpaprobono.org) and agreed to review the Hazelwoods' finances. Here is what she suggests. * SELL THE OLD PROPERTY Darryl and Jennifer know they must demolish their old house. But they are considering holding on to the land as an investment. Local realtors estimate that the property would fetch around $50,000 now. Gadkowski's verdict: Sell it. Combined with their last insurance check, the sale could give the couple a much needed $70,000 to help finance their fresh start. * PAY OFF DEBT use part of the proceeds to pay off the $4,800 they still owe on credit cards and the $23,300 balance on a home-equity line of credit. And resist the temptation to borrow against any equity they build up in the new home. "It's very dangerous to think of home equity as an ATM that you can get money from when you need it," says the planner. * GET A GRIP The Hazelwoods bought their expenses will be. They didn't think about the new furniture they'll have to buy, for instance, or their child-care bills once Jennifer goes back to work. Even under the couple's most optimistic scenarios, Gadkowski believes, they'll feel squeezed when their mortgage payments rise next year. So the planner urges the Hazelwoods to look for places to cut back. Consider buying an inexpensive car with some of the proceeds from the property sale, and dumping the $285-a-month wheels they're leasing now. Maybe put some of the money toward the new mortgage to reduce the payments. And eat out less, knocking off $200 or so from that $1,000-a-month food bill. * LOOK TO THE FUTURE Gadkowski urges the Hazelwoods to save the rest of the money from the property sale for emergencies and their children's education. They should aim to keep about $15,000 in their short-term savings account, enough to cover at least three months of living expenses once their full mortgage kicks in. They should also set aside money to send Emily and Dylan. Cost: $3,000 a year. Jennifer and Darryl aren't sure how much of Gadkowski's advice they'll take. They're especially reluctant to sell the old property. But as the couple prepare for yet another move, they're keenly aware that they have a once-in-a-lifetime chance to start over on solid financial ground in the city they love, and they don't want to blow it. "I'm excited," says Jennifer. "I can't tell if this is really the end of the tunnel, but I'm definitely starting to see the light." This article contains a table. Please see hardcopy of magazine or PDF. THE BOTTOM LINE The Hazelwoods' insurance settlement will not be enough to finance a fresh start. The planner's advice: Sell the old property to help build a cash cushion. Table
Martin Cunningham baited his fishhook with another clump of smelly pink salmon eggs and cast it into southwest Washington's Cowlitz River. As the boat drifted with the current last July, the 3-year-old First Class Scout felt his bait go bump-bump-bump along the rocky river bottom. Then came a sharp tug on the line. Martin quickly pulled up on his rod tip to set the hook in the steelhead's mouth. As the silver rocket shot out of the river, Martin's rod should have bent as line ripped off the spinning reel. But it didn't. The fish shook loose. Fishing's for the Birds Martin reeled in the empty hook and frowned. "I'm not fishing. I'm just feeding the fish" As he took more salmon eggs from the bait box, he caught a glimpse of a great bird. An osprey leaped from its perch high atop a Douglas fir tree and swooped down to the river. The fish hawk swept its talons through the surface with deadly precision and came up with a steelhead so big that the bird Now that's fishing," he said. Fishing Lessons But being bested by a bird did not bother Martin. "They're experts," he said. "I'm still learning." This was the first time Martin and other Scouts in his Renton, Wash., Troop 462 had fished for steelhead. A steelhead is a big rainbow trout. Rainbows are found in lakes and rivers across the United States, but only the ones that swim downstream and out to sea are called steelhead. (See "The Sea-Run Rainbow" box, next page.) These fish return upriver to spawn after a year or two at sea. Many return to the Cowlitz. Hundreds of thousands of hatchery-raised steelhead smolts are released in the river each year -- more than a million in 1993 alone. Got ta Getta Guide When the steelhead summer run began last year, Troop 462 was ready. The Scouts had long planned for the trip, thanks to Scoutmaster Joseph Madrano, an avid angler. With all frustrating. So he suggested a way for the Scouts to better their chances at catching steelhead: hire fishing guides. Guides live an angler's dream. They fish all the time and get paid to do it. While the rest of the world goes to work, guides are on the water. They're also working, of course -- but, hey, they're still fishing.) Because of all their time on the water, guides know where to go and how best to catch fish. Take a Tip: Fish First, Fish Early That knowledge comes at a cost. The rate for a day of steelhead fishing is about $150 per person. Considering you can just plop down on a riverbank and toss out your hook for free, that sounds like a lot of money. "But when you have only one day to fish," Mr. Madrano said, "a guide makes the difference between caching something or going home empty-handed. Plus the professional teaches you things you can use Scouts' fishing luck had already changed. They found a guide service that made them a special deal, $150 per boat. The first pro tip came early -- as in 5:30 A.M. "Fish can feed all day and night," explained Clancy Holt, a guide of 40 years. "But Saturday there'll be other fisherman on the water. They'll spook the steelhead, and the fish will stop biting. We need an early start so our bait is the first that the fish see." A light fog floated on the river surface as the Scouts' four boats headed for the first fishing spot at dawn. "Awesome," said Tenderfoot Scout Erik Westover, 13, as the jet-drive outboard motors scooted the 20-foot-long flat-bottom boats down the shallow At a riverbend, the guides staggered the boats, letting the current drift them along the deep bend. After each run, the boats moved back to the beginning and drifted down again.' Fish in the Boat' Martin had the other information over marine radios. Not much later, the radios crackled with another report -- Martin had another fish on downstream. As his spinning reel let loose a scream, a steelhead shot up, seemingly dancing on the surface. It dived and Martin began to reel in line. The fish jumped, spun across the river -- and Martin reeled hard. Within 15 minutes, the tired fish came close enough to the boat to be netted. "Fish in the boat" guide Ken Marsyla reported over the radio. Silence followed congratulations as Scouts worked the river for their catches. Time passed peacefully amid the beauty of the lush Pacific Northwest. Blacktail deer, mink and raccoon came out of the forests to drink from the Cowlitz. Sparrows by the thousands dug nests high on the riverbank. A Solid Catch? Then Aaron Ritchey felt a tug on his line. The 12-year-old set his hook and reeled in his catch. The radios reported: "Aaron's caught a rock fish." A "looked like. The reply gave a detailed description of a stone. Loud laughter echoed down the river. Still, Aaron, who managed to hook three steelhead, had the last laugh. He finally boated a nine-pounder -- steelhead, that is. By day's end, all the Scouts had had one good hit. A few, like Aaron, had hooked more than one steelhead and enjoyed the exciting battle for which the big fish is famous. From River to Dinner The troop returned to camp with five fine fish. Now came what many consider the best part of steelhead fishing -- the eating. "It's hard to find a better-tasting fish than steelhead," said Scoutmaster Madrano. It's even harder to find the fish, because with very few exceptions, it is not sold in stores. If you want one, you have to catch it. As the cook re burned down and the troop chefs prepared for dinner, a couple of Scouts studied the catch. "Looks for dinner," Daniel Rezac observed, pointing to claw marks on three fish. Martin Cunningham remembered the osprey and its catch. "We're not the only ones who love steelhead," he said.
Fishing folks have lots of sayings, some better known than others. Among them: "It's called fishing, not catching" and "Desperate times demand desperate measures." Then there's, "Break out the surefire fish caller!" This last one is the new favorite of anglers from Troop 749 of The Dalles, Ore. It gets used in emergencies, such as slow times when frustrated fishermen need something, anything, to change their luck. Starting the Process Such a frustratingly slow time occurred last October. Sitting in a 26-foot boat on the Columbia River, the four Scouts waited on walleye. And they waited. And they waited. First Class Scout Derek Campbell sighed. "Well," the 13-year-old said, working his rod, "it's called fishing, ya know, not catching." The process had started. Soon someone would mention what a desperate situation the fishless fishermen were in. Then, a little later, an emergency would be declared and out would come the surefire fish callers. Early Warnings But had paid off earlier in the day. When the Scouts first boarded the twin-engine boat owned by fishing guide Pat Kelley, they heard good and bad news. Photograph T-i-ick, t-o-ock: Matthew Walton waits and waits and (sigh waits for a bite. Photograph Patience. Nathan and Matthew Walton and other Scout anglers needed lots of it to hook this steelhead (top and walleye. // Mr. Kelley, who has fished the Columbia 200 days a year for the past 15 years, said, "Walleye weren't biting yesterday." The good news? "We're going to start out after steelhead this morning, then try to find walleye this afternoon." While the Columbia River is famous for holding a variety of fish species, from four-pound smallmouth bass to 400-pound sturgeon, steelhead ranks high on any angler's wish list. These rainbow trout swim to sea, where they grow into giants, then return to rivers to spawn. "Catching 10-pounders and up is common," Mr. Kelley said., 13. "The biggest fish I ever caught was a seven-inch trout." "It weighed about a pound," Zachary Walton, Nathan's twin, said. "You'll easily beat that." Wetting Lines The boat ran up to the John Day River, a tributary feeding into the Columbia. There, several dozen boats slowly trolled deepdiving plugs for steelhead. Mr. Kelley shut down his boat's big engines and fired up a 1 horsepower outboard motor to move the boat at the right trolling speed. Assistant Scoutmaster Doug Walton, the Walton brothers' dad, helped rig graphite rods for the Scouts. "Derek and Zachary will fish off the stern," Mr. Kelley said. "Let out 60 pulls of line. A pull is about a foot. Nathan and Matthew will fish amidships, letting out 40 pulls." "Rod tips throbbed as the plugs vibrated and dipped behind the slow-moving boat. Derek scanned the other boats nearby and saw one dragging a five-gallon bucket." said with a laugh. Bucketfish? As he was told that some anglers use a bucket to slow their boat to the proper trolling speed, Matthew Walton jumped as if a bomb had ex ploded under him. Photograph Heading for another fishing hole, adults teach Scouts how to operate their boat // "Fish on! Fish on!" he hollered. The other three lines got reeled in quickly to avoid tangling. Matthew also reeled fast, though carefully. Suddenly, his face went slack, just as his line did. The fish had thrown the lure. "There'll be another fish," Mr. Kelley said. And almost as soon as the lines were back out, Nathan took a turn at hollering. "I've got a fish; I've got a fish!" Nathan struggled with his bowed rod as a silvery rocket erupted behind the boat. The boys cheered him on as the steelhead surged in the still water, then turned and swam toward the boat. "Reel ready." Edge him a little closer ...." And he netted the supersize trout. A Personal Record As brother Zachary had predicted, Nathan beat his record. A 12-pound steelhead was now his biggest fish. After lunch, Derek Campbell suggested: "Let's catch another steelhead before we go for walleye. "So the Scouts trolled another 45 minutes. They watched fish get hooked, but by other boats. It was time for walleye. On the five-mile run upriver, Mr. Walton, recently retired from the U.S. Coast Guard, explained navigation as Mr. Kelley gave each Scout a lesson in boat handling. Photograph How big?" Matthew Walton, right, listens to brother Zachary tell a big-fish, urn, tale. Photograph Laws say how many and what size fish anglers can keep. Here, Wendy Martin of Oregon's Department of Fish and Wildlife helps measure the Scouts' steelhead for her research. Photograph Got one! Derek Campbell, Nathan Walton, Zachary Walton and Matthew Walton (left for walleye. // At the fishing area, the boys were told to slowly bounce their bait a few inches off the bottom, where walleye feed. Matthew jigged just right, raising his rod tip a few inches, then lowering it, raising, lowering-boom! The rod bent. "I got one," he squealed, reeling a 12-inch yellow perch to the surface. "Where there's perch there should be walleye," Mr. Kelley offered. "They like perch for dinner too." Here Walleye, Walleye, Walleye' Unfortunately, there were no walleye. The Scouts sat and waited and waited. Soon Derek made the fishing-notcatching remark. Desperation set in. "Break out the surefire fish caller!" Derek said. He opened a soft drink, pulled loose its tab, and pressed it to his lips. "Here walleye, walleye, walleye, walleye!" he called. What happened soon afterward is the kind of thing you had to see to believe. Matthew hollered Scouts cheered as the net swept into the green water and pulled back a two-pound walleye. The boys' luck had turned. And as Derek put away his surefire fish caller, everyone understood yet another angler's saying: "Never be afraid to try something new." + Photograph A day's take (from top): Derek with a walleye, Nathan with a steelhead, Zachary with a perch, Matthew with a walleye. Sidebar FISH FACTS Walleye (Stizostedion vitreum) International Game Fish Association (IGFA) all-tackle world record: 25 pounds. Wide-ranging North American species (introduced in Washington and Oregon). Largest member of perch family. * Gets name from its large glassy eyes. Extremely popular sport fish with anglers. Excellent eating. Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) IGFA all-tackle record: 42 pounds 2 ounces. lives in rivers and lakes; ocean-going rainbow are called steelhead. Also known as "black-spotted" trout. A fisherman's favorite: It fights hard when hooked, tastes great all-tackle record: 4 pounds 3 ounces. Widespread in northern United States and Canada. Stocked in every state; sparse in South and widespread in North. Some wrongly consider this to be a bass. It's more closely related to walleye and sauger. Average size caught: 4 to 1 2 ounces. Has tasty, flaky flesh. //
Stuff a time capsule with your things, and you'll forever save today for tomorrow. Here's how to build your own homemade time capsule! TEXT AND PHOTOGRAPHS BY DIANA LYNN // The Scouts of Sunnyvale, Calif., Troop 463 know where they're going to be January 2018. They have promised to meet again to celebrate their troop's 50th anniversary, swap stories and remember the good ol days-way back in 1999. People tend to forget a lot of things about the past. But these Scouts won't. They've built a time capsule to open at their 2018 reunion. You can build one too. It's a great way to capture the past. (Only one more month until 2000!) Rember When... "We'll get a laugh out of this thing in 20 years!" Tenderfoot Scout David Yurash said, holding up a Sega Game Gear. Then he stuck the electronic game into the time capsule. Other Scouts added more items until the olng plastic cylinder was stuffed with everything from a wood marshmallow stick to a, carried the heavy capsule to the underground "vault" they had prepared, sealed the capsule, buried it and built a concrete marker over the top. May it rest in peace until they dig it up in 19 years. "I'll be back here for the capsule opening even if I live across the country." Life Scout Anthony Comfort said. "I wouldn't miss our reunion for the world." Doing It Right Troop 463 used a heavy-duty capsule, a 44-inch-long polyethylene container like those the U.S. Navy uses to store sonobuoys (which track enemy submarines). Photograph Preparing to dig into the future are (from left) Troop 463 Scouts Photograph Trevor Williams, Michael Wolfram, Brian Thurgate, Grant Martinez and Joe Miltenberger. Photograph Each Scout-like (from left) David Urash, Joe Miltenberger and Trevor Williams-provides two or three items for the capsule. // The Scouts were careful to follow a few basic rules of capsule-building, such as: Seal the capsule on a dry day.. Keep items dry by storing each item in a polyethylene bag. Avoid rubber bands, which break down over time, melting into goo. Use cotton and natural cloth, which tend to last longer than other fabrics. Copy newspaper and magazine articles and photographs onto long-lasting acid-free paper. Roll instead of folding items. Old, folded paper tends to tear instead of unfolding. Tag each item identifying the donor, the nature of the item and its name. Avoid repeating items. Buried Treasure Keeping water out of an underground capsule is no easy trick. That's why some capsules are stored in closets, built into walls or even left out in full view. Buried capsules must be sealed with silicon and plastic tape before the entire outside is coated with pitch or asphalt. Then that's wrapped in plastic. The capsule is then laid into a "vault," a hole 3 feet deep, with 6 inches of gravel on the bottom and concrete walls. Finally it's covered with sand or don't just remind us of the past. They also let us speak to the future. Troop 463 sent this message to 2018: "The values of the Scout Oath and Law will be as important in the future as they are today." Photograph // Then they put into the capsule their own predictions and hopes for the year 2018. Many wrote about how different the future will be. Some wrote about how they want to become computer experts. Others wrote about becoming FBI agents, aerospace engineers, kayaking instructors, jet pilots or racecar drivers. In 20 years, their hopes and predictions might or might not come true. Either way, they'll never forget. Capsulized History Unlike Troop 463's, some capsules are made by accident. Sunken ships, lost treasures and forgotten trunks in attics make us feel connected to bygone days. Ancient Egyptian tombs are like time capsules too. Photograph Troop 463 puts the finishing touches on its project The Scouts did everything themselves, including setting the concrete the first real time capsule, called the Century Safe, was made on purpose for the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. Then, in 1939, a capsule was buried 50 feet below the grounds of the New York World's Fair, and the name "Time Capsule" first appeared. (That capsule isn't scheduled to be opened until 6939!) 'Hellooo! Anybody Out There?' If one of the time capsules shot into space ever drifts onto the area of another inhabited planet-stand back! Space alienen and rock music could be a dangerous combination. In 1997 NASA launched two time capsules aboard twoVoyager spacecfaft. Today, the capsules travel a milliom miles a day into deep space. Each capsule contains a gold-plated phnograph record telling about life on Earth. There's not much chance anyone (anything?) will ever play one of these records. But if they do, they'll hear "hello" in 55 Earth languages, the the calls of humpback whale, the cry of a human that aliens will discover in each capsule: 116 photographs of humans living their ordinary lives around our planet. That'll scare'em! Sidebar Your Time Capsule Checklist Don't forget to include these items in your time capsule. The might seem ordinary now, but who knows what future civilizations might think? Scouting items: knife, compass etc. a Scout uniform photographs of yourselves with names written on the back (Black and white last longer, color photos fade.) crafts made by the troop a set of coins and stamps copies of Scout songs written and recorded troop stories (funny, sad or scary things that have happened-include anything that Scouts would like to read about in the future) letters from each Scout telling about himself and what he plans to be doing in the future a letter from the troop telling what they hope for in the future a list of all members' name and addresses copies of Boys' Life and other current magazines and newspapers predictions letters from the parents to their sons popular electronis devices, MISSING TIME CAPSULES The Scouts Troop 463 will have a lot of fun opening their time capsule in 2018. Others haven't been so lucky. The Bicentennial Wagon Train Capsule: This famous capsule held the signature of 22 million Americans. But on July 4, 1976, when President Gerald Ford arrived at the dedication ceremony in Valley Forge. Pa., the capsule couldn't be found. Someone had stolen it. The Corona Time Capsules: The California city of Corona misplaced 17 time capsules dating to the 1930's. People have torn up a lot of concrete around city hall but still haven't found them. The M*A*S*H Time Capsule: In 1983, the actors in this popular television show buried some of their props and costumes in a secret time capsule ceremony. Now the parking lot where they buried it may be under a giant new hotel. No one will say. The Capsule of Blackpool Tower: It was buried into the foundation of an English tower in the 1800's but now it's, and it remains an unsolved mystery. To avoid losing your time capsule, register its location and contents with the International Time Capsule Society. Ogelthorpe University, 4484 Peachtree Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30319; phone (404) 261-1441 ext. 315; on the Internet ww.oglethorpe.edu/itcs ITCS spokesman Paul Hudson says there are approximately 10,000 capsules worldwide, most of them lost. The ITCS database will serve to remind future generations of existing capsules so they are not forgotten or lost. //
An icy Sierra wind lashed the Scouts of Troop 341 as they piled out of their warm van. The boys strapped on snowshoes and backpacks, grabbed their ski poles and tramped out into the crusted snow. Ahead of them lay six miles of deep snowfields, separating the Carson City, Nev., troop from their objective, the crest of 10,776-foot Mount Rose. Climbing the rugged peak, which towers over Lake Tahoe in nearby Washoe County, was just part of the troop's larger plan. The boys wanted to scale the highest points in all 17 Nevada counties. So far they'd sucNeeded 10 out of 11 times, So fall duringthe summer. Mount Rose, a winter climb, would teach them some useful lessons. Reaching one's goals sometimes requires patience as well as determination, and safety always comes first. The Scouts would also discover that a little fun can wring the sting from defeat. Heavy Going As they moved away from the road, the wet snow turned deep, three feet or more, which was a surprise. They expected hard-packed trail. Instead, the Scouts found themselves struggling with the unfamiliar snowshoes. "It was pretty cold," says 15-year-old Mike Reynolds, a Life Scout. "The climb was pretty tough. We had to take large steps so that we didn't walk on our snowshoes. But after a while we got used to it." Using their ski poles to help avert rock dives, the Scouts fell into single file, taking turns breaking trail. The hard work and thin air kept chatter to a minimum. Photograph Photograph // A couple of miles and a couple of hours later, the trail turned steeper and the sun came out. Now the Scouts needed to consider a potential problem. Heat from the sun meant snowmelt, which can lubricate the undersides of snowfields, increasing the risk of avalanche. As the day warmed up, the guys walked farther apart and tied on brightly colored avalanche cords. In case the snow gave way, these light -- weight lines would ride its surface and the troop hit an impasse. The steepening trail ahead rose at more than 35 degrees, making it dangerously prone to avalanche. Already they could feel the snow begin to shift beneath their feet. Because this was a day hike and afternoon shadows already were lengthening, there was no choice but to turn around. The snow was too deep to slide back down the mountain, as the boys had hoped, so 15-year-old Tyson Reed, a Life Scout, showed them how to improvise. Tyson just ran until his snowshoes got tangled up. "It was the best part of the hike," he says. "Running down the Photograph Duke and Tyson, with Mike Reynolds in the middle, practice probing for avalanche victims. Below: Tyson breaks trail // MISSION ACCOMPLISHED: THE 17 PEAKS TROOP 341 HAS CLIMBED Photograph // mountain in the deep snow I did two face-plants when my body got ahead of my feet." The Easy Way Troop 341 returned to Mount Rose that summer when the snow and. "It was a lot easier," Mike Reynolds laughs. But not particularly rewarding. "There's really not much up there. Just a bunch of rocks and bushes and stuff." The boys also went to work on the rest of their list, and by the end of summer, they had just two more of the 17 high points left to conquer: 11,387-foot Ruby Dome in Elko County, and 10,614 -- foot Diamond Peak in Eureka County. But the Scouts also were determined to make a winter climb of Mount Rose. So last March they once again headed back out into the cold. This time they planned on an overnight expedition, hefting 50-pound packs as they trudged up the trail. Familiar Location It was a little later in the season than their first attempt, and the snow wasn't so deep. At 4 o'clock that afternoon, after seven hours of hiking, they bivouacked at the same spot where they'd turned back one year before. With a brisk wind of noodles and broth with cider, then turned in, certain that with the break of day they would easily hike the final 800 vertical feet to the top. By dawn thick clouds had gathered, and a storm was howling over the mountain. Troop 341's adult leaders guessed by the length and shape of the snow plume streaming off Mount Rose's summit that the wind up there was blowing 50 to 60 miles an hour. With no sign the storm would let up soon, the boys headed back down the mountain once more. "It was discouraging," Tyson Reed admits. "When you have to turn around it's like Doh!" Sliding Into Home This time, it was Mike Reynolds's turn to make lemonade out of lemons. Mike had lugged a snowboard along- "that was a pain," he says-but now came his reward, miles of deep, untouched snow that Mike happily shredded most of the way to the bottom. "It was really worth it, for the 50-pound pack on my back." Back in Carson City, the boys reflected on their two failed attempts and decided that a third try might be the charm. In the meantime, they scaled Ruby Dome and Diamond Peak, finally reaching their original goal. "We're determined to make that winter climb," says Tyson. "We'll adjust, maybe bring enough stuff to stay an extra day. We know we can't control the weather. But we'll probably keep trying until we get to the top." That'll be the most fun of all. Photograph Top: Duke uses his plastic compass to gauge the slope s steepness. Above: Duke, Tyson and Mike display the troop flag at the trailhead. Sidebar Avalanche Fast Facts Sidebar 1) An avalanche can consist of rock, mud or dirt, but in English-speaking countries avalanche usually means a mass of snow in motion down a mountainside. 2) There are two basic types of avalanches, A loose snow avalanche it flows down a mountainside. A slab avalanche occurs when a large mass of cohesive snow breaks loose all at once. Slab avalanches are the more dangerous. Sidebar 3) The worst avalanche in U.S. history occurred March 1, 1910, near Wellington, Wash. Two passenger trains, trapped by snow, were swept off the tracks by an avalanche that killed 96 people. 4) Periods of greatest avalanche danger occur during and immediately after big storms and high winds. 5) It an avalanche catches you, your best chance of survival is to "swim" as strongly as possible in order to stay on or near the surface. Sidebar 6) If an avalanche buries you, immediately cover your face to protect your nose and mouth and to create an air pocket that will allow you to breathe while your friends dig you out. You have an 80 percent chance of survival if your friends find you within the first few minutes. After one half hour. your chance of survival drops to 50 along ridge tops. Never travel alone. Travel buddies should always keep one another in sight. -Buck tilton Sidebar BE PREPARED Sidebar To quality for the winter Mount Rose climb, the boys had to be at least First Class Scouts and have already scaled at least three peaks on Troop 341's list (opposite page), In addition. the Scouts all attended previous winter camps at which they learned skills from igloo-building to cooking in freezing weather. Each also attended a snowshoeing clinic. Sidebar Each Scout packed the following gear on each of the two climbs: * Change of clothing * Sleeping mat * 100 feet of avalanche chord * Compass * Three liters (3.2 quarts) of water * Sunblock Sidebar * First-aid kit * Topographic map * Pack shovel Sidebar * Sleeping bag * Lunch and dinner, plus extra food * Pack stove adn mess kit * Camera (optimal) * Trail snacks * Flashlight or candle lantern * Knife Sidebar Additionally, on the second climb they carried tents, extra food, extra boots Battling artic temperatures -- and the ocassional angry seal -- Eagle Scout Tim Brox discovers his life's pursuit. Photograph Tim Brox, in his extreme cold weather gear, at the ceremonial South Pole. A Weddell seal pup shows it's not as thrilled as Tim about participating in the 30-year tagging project. Photograph // Tim Brox of Troop 140 knew he was in for an adventure when he put on his standard-issue clothing. It was winter in Fesno, Calif., and most off his buddies were finishing their first semester of college. Tim, though, was trying on parkas. He'd need a heavy coat while at the bottom of the world. Tim had beaten out a field of more than 150 other Eagle Scouts to participate in the 2001-02 NSF-BSA Antarctic Scientific Program, sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Boy Scouts of America. Tim was to spend almost eight weeks. He end up staying six months. Sunglasses at Night While it was late fall back home in California when Tim took off in October 2001, it was summer in Antarctica The day Tim visited the South Pole, it was minus 40 degrees! He was ready for that thanks to his big red parka. "It was bigger and warmer than anything I've ever worn in California," he says. What Tim couldn't prepare for was the blinding brightness. Antarctica is a frozen tundra-98 percent ice sheet and 2 percent barren rock. All that ice and snow produces a serious glare. Add a little sunlight (which never sets during Antarctic summers), and you have a brilliance going in all directions -- like when sunlight hits a mirror. Photograph Left: At the geographic South pole, a sign displays quotations from the first explorers to reach the pole. Right: Tim before the geodesic dome at the South pole Station. Photograph Above: Tim prepares to tie a bowline around the geographic South Pole marker. Left: Investigator Sam Bowser and another team member study large single cell organisms called Foraminifers at the New Habor Field Camp. // "We got in at was as light as it is in the afternoon. "I'd look around and say to myself, Where am I now?" After a while, you realize you're in the middle of nowhere. I wouldn't have been able to sleep, but luckily my dorm room didn't have any windows. "Elbow Grease No job was too big or small. At McMurdo Station, Antarctica's largest scientific community, he worked with Raytheon Polar Services and spent a lot of time in the snowmobile shop. He learned light vehicle maintenance and repair, something, he says," I knew absolutely nothing about when I started. "Photograph On a trip to a snow cave, Tim's team parks far from their destination then walks to avoid ice cracks. Right: A Hercules cargo plane transports people, cargo and fuel. Photograph Left At the geographic South pole, a sign displays quotations from the first explorers to reach the pole. Right: Tim before the geodesic dome at the South cave, Tim's team parks far from their destination then walks to avoid ice cracks. Right: A Hercules cargo plane transports people, cargo and fuel. // He also helped out a buddy that was a "fuelie," which is kind of like a gas station attendant. But instead of filling up a 15-gallon tank, a fuelie is responsible for filling up 50-gallon drums and airplane fuel tanks. Tim's favorite job was at a satellite camp. He became involved with University of Minnesota researchers studying Weddell seals. For the past 30 years, teams of scientists have visited Antarctica and tagged seals. They later round them up and study their behavior, weight gain and loss and other factors. "I did the exact same jobs everyone else did," Tim says proudly of his work tagging seals. "I'd never been up close and personal with any large animal at all before this. An average adult was about 800 pounds, and they could easily be six feet long." docile, though he did get scared a few times. "The seals were pretty nice," he says. "They can't go too fast on the land, so if they got mad, you'd just run away from them. I ran away a couple of times. They didn't chase me, though. They're lazy. They just sunbathe all day." Ice Sculptures Tim returned to California on March 21. After six months at the bottom of the world, he grew to appreciate the Antarctic landscape. He especially liked the pressure ridges, where two sheets of ice, shaped by wind and sun, push up against each other. "It's absolutely beautiful," he says. "It's a winter wonderland down there. I've never seen anything like it, but hope to see it again, and many more times. I can't think of another place on the earth as beautiful as Antarctica." He might get a chance to see it decided he wants to be a research scientist, like his new friends at McMurdo Station. "I still keep in touch with a number of people from Antarctica," Tim says. "They all shared my interests and helped me decide on my ultimate goal." Photograph Tim tags a Weddell seal pup a few miles from McMurdo Station. Sidebar COME ON ABOARD You too can follow in Tim's icy footsteps. Scouts may apply for the 2003-04 NSF -- BSA Antarctic Scientific Program when applications become available next month at local council service centers and available next at local council service centers Candidates applying for, the 2003-04 trip have to: * Be a registered member of the BSA * Have a minimum of three years membership in the BSA. * Be age 17 1/2 but not yet 21 as of June 1, 2003. * Have earned the Eagle Scout rank. * Be available for training during the faN of These basic rules may change; consult these application. The deadline to submit your application is Feb. IT ALL SEEMS TOO REAL-THE CRASH, THE EMERGENCIES, THE INJURIES, BUT DO N'T WORRY, THIS COLD-WEATHER CONTEST IS JUST PART OF THE MARIN COUNCIL KLONDIKE DERBY. Photograph These Scouts wouldn't stand a chance in the Marin Council's Klondike Derby without their winter survival skills. Photograph These Scouts wouldn't stand a chance in the Marin Council's Klondike Derby without their winter survival skills. // Marc Sinnott is on a trip to the Arctic on the S.S. Talako. But his ship has crashed into an iceberg, and he and the rest of the patrol from Troop 43, Larkspur, Calif., have been forced to board rafts and seek safety on the nearest block of ice. Now, Marc, 16, and his fellow Scouts must survive on their own until a rescue team arrives. Welcome to the Marin Council Klondike Derby, also known as "S.O.S." The test of survival is part of a game in which patrols compete against each other using a variety of Scouting skills. Although the Talako and the trip to the Arctic were ail imagined at Camp Marin-Sierra, located near the town of Emigrant Gap, Calif. In March 2003, snowdrifts were several feet high and temperatures hovered just below freezing. "It requires teamwork and spirit and other skills you would use in a Scouting competition," Marc says. "And the snow made it really cool."? The Klondike consisted of five scenarios, with a sled race at the end. There were 11 patrols of five to eight Scouts each. Every year, the Marin Council has a different theme for its Klondike derby. Andrew Wilson, a Life Scout with Troop 48, Tiburon, Calif., came up with the idea of the "S.O.S." theme with fellow troop member Ryan Chan and local members of the Order of the Arrow. Talako is actually the name of the Order of the Arrow lodge; Andrew is lodge chief. Photograph Left: Scouts from Troop 12 earn points in the hypothermia drill by keeping the "victim" warm and dry. Below left: In the left: While Troop 11 prepares a snow shelter, the Scouts from Troop 73 (left) try to start a fire under a steady snowfall. // "We wanted to come up with something that would require all kinds of skills, like building fires, orienteering and pioneering," Andrew says. The Storyline The first obstacle faced by Scouts is a test of winter first-aid skills. The story goes like this: After the shipwreck, a Scout is found washed up on an iceberg, suffering from hypothermia and injuries. Again, the symptoms are fake, but the skills needed to pass the test are real. Patrols receive points for using the appropriate skills in the least amount of time. In this case, Scouts have to get the victim warm and dry while applying medical attention to his injuries. The key to treating a victim of hypothermia is to shelter him from wind and cold. So they got him out of wet clothing and warmed him up with hot drinks and a warm sleeping bag skills. A member of the patrol is in desperate need of a medical kit. Seems he has a condition that, without the proper medication, can kill him. The only problem is that the medical kit lies 10 feet out of reach on an iceberg (really a 10-foot-wide icy cold stream). The patrol has 30 minutes to get the medical kit and save the Scout. "The only things they can use are poles and a lashing rope to build a device to retrieve the kit," Andrew says. Troop 43 lashed together two long poles and tied another rope at the end to use as a guide rope. At the end of the poles, they used a wire hanger as a hook to scoop up the kit, just under the deadline. "It takes a lot of teamwork," Marc says. "It's neat to think about how we could actually apply those skills to real things." The Plot Thickens One of the most important aspects of winter survival is thickest clothes in the world won't keep you warm. The lost patrol is running out of food. As luck would have it, the Scouts stumble across a can of food that survived the shipwreck. In order to complete this stage, patrols must successfully cook and eat the food in the least amount of time. Scouts are given two matches and a can opener, but the rest is up to them. If they need any extra matches, they lose valuable points. With kindling hard to find, patrols were allowed to bring in their own firewood. But getting a fire started in the middle of the snow is the real challenge-unless you're with Troop 73, Novato, Calif. That patrol breezed past the competition with a homemade device that, consisted of a string attached to an empty tuna can filled with wax. What they ended up with was an oversize candle that could be used to start the fire. It took only one match to get it started. "Some of the 12-year-old First Class Scout Kevin Wilmunder." But it didn't take us long at all." But now things are getting desperate for the "lost" patrols. If they don't find help soon, they'll be goners for sure. Then comes the big break. A search of the area turns up an emergency radio. The problem is that the Scout who found the radio had to leave it behind to get the rest of his teammates. He marked his path using articles of clothing. Now the Scouts must follow the trail of clothing and use their orienteering skills to find the radio in 30 minutes or less. "They are judged on their speed and their accuracy," Andrew says. "If they don't find all the checkpoints, they lose points." Photograph Scouts must prepare a meal with one can of food, two matches and their own fire-starting kit. // The Final Chapter One last obstacle remains. A huge snowstorm has left all but one of the Scouts of leadership skills, as one brave Scout must lead the rest of his patrol out of danger. Half of the group is blindfolded. The other half must simulate an injury by walking on just one leg. And they can't say a word. When it was all over, and all of the patrols had been rescued, the Scouts found time at the end for a sled race. Patrols had to bring their own homemade sleds. The first part of the race was an obstacle course that required teamwork to steer the sled through. The final stretch was sheer speed. "We were timed going both uphill and downhill, with some twists and turns in between," Kevin says. "We got it going pretty fast at the end." Throughout the two-day event, patrols were not only judged on time and the goals they achieved, but also on spirit. A troop yell before each event was a sure way to impress the judges. "I like that we were graded on cheer loud and show our enthusiasm. Our troop is pretty good at that." A SURE FIRE STARTER Troop 78 started its fire with an empty can of tuna fish and some string. It just goes to show that starting a fire in the snow is often a matter of using your brain as much as your hands. Another way to start a fire that works every time requires only cotton, petroleum jelly and an empty 35-millimeter film canister. Grab enough cotton to form a shape about the size of a tennis ball. Squeeze it down by mixing it with a marble-size gfob of petroleum jelly. Pack the jelly-covered cotton tightly into the film canister. To use the item to start your fire, pull out a small amount of the fluff to give it room to breathe. One match should do the trick every time. For more information on winter Scouting skills, check out "Okpik: Cold-Weather Camping" (BSA Supply Ko. 34040; 1-800-323-0732; vww.scoutstuff.org). Photograph Left: The Life object that's 10 feet away. Above: In the final section of the derby, one brave leading Scout has to lead his "injured" crew (below) to safety. // ALL TIED UP A lashing is anything used for securing or binding. Centuries ago, people used lashing to create tools and weapons. At the Marin Council Klondike Derby, Scouts had to Lash two poles together to create a tool that could pick up an item ttlat was 10 feet away. This is called two-spar shear lashing. (A spar is a wooden or metal pole.) The two-spar shear lashing technique is ideal when the goal is to extend the length of one, piece of wood by attaching another to it. Start with a clove hitch knot an one piece of wood. Then make several wraps above the knot around both pieces of wood. To pull the wraps tight, make trapping turns to take up the slack, and then tie a clove hitch, knot on the other spar, at on rope, knots and lashing, check out the "Pioneering" merit badge pasnphiet (BSA Supply No. 33377; 1-800-323-0732; www.scoutstuff.org).
City sidewalk meanders through Michael Barclary's woodland paradise in Kensington, California. At rear is a spectacular Rhododendron nuttallii' John Paul Evans'. // Passionate gardeners have one thing in common-a need for plants in their lives. Their gardens are often filled with horticultural gems collected from specialty nurseries, botanical garden plant sales, and friends' backyards. Within this group of gardeners are the true masters: those who put plants together in such artful ways that they appear unstudied, almost spontaneous-as though planted by nature. On the following pages, we meet five such gardeners: Michael Barclay, creator of a lush woodland garden, Dan Heims, who skillfully weaves foliage plants into a living tapestry of green, Judy Wigand, who combines perennials with great flourish, and Gwen and Panayoti Kelaidis, alpine rock-garden enthusiasts. Some of us get so carried away, our lives and gardens become inseparable," says plantsman extraordinaire and garden designer Michael Barclay. One glance at Barclay's 1/s-acre garden in the East Bay hills overlooking the San Francisco Bay tells you that this kindly garden the wild kingdom or the Garden of Eden: it doesn't contain a single patch of bare earth. "When you're a collector nut, there's no cure. Even if I had more space to garden, it would look like this," he says, gesturing toward the layers of 1,800 species and varieties that make up his woodland garden. Gardening has been in Barclay's blood since he was a boy in New York and his grandfather showed him how to grow vegetables. Although he didn't make a career of gardening until years later, those early lessons stayed with him. The gardening bug resurfaced when he purchased his double-lot home in Kensington in 1968. "I knew nothing about West Coast gardening, but I couldn't wait to get a trowel in the ground. I really misunderstood the climate." He started with a tropical garden that "looked like Miami Beach." Four years later, he lost almost everything in the big freeze of' 72. "I about my climate zone and analyzed the few things that had survived." Barclay then decided that what the front yard needed was a woodland. But it contained only one spruce tree. Now the woodland garden runs the length of his house, including the parking strip. "It's a crazy space, 126 feet long and 12 feet wide at its widest, so I wanted it to be playful." Before planting, Barclay dug out all of the soil and replaced it with an acid soil mix. During the next year or two, he spent every available cent on bags of oak leaf mold and soil blend for rhododendrons. To develop quick shade, he planted some fast-growing conifers. Then, using Pink Pearl' rhododendron and common snowball as the lead colors, Barclay planted a pink- and whiteflowered woodland garden accented with blue and purple. He set out trees and shrubs "in as many heights as possible" to create density and layers. The top layer consists of flowering deciduous magnolias-Magnolia' Next are the Japanese maples. "I adore the fernleaf fullmoon maple (Acer japonicum' Aconitifolium') and tricolored A. palmatum' Shishihengen'," says Barclay. Mixed among them are 60 species and varieties of rhododendrons. Dwarf and slow-growing conifers add distinctive texture to the magnolias and rhododendrons. Barclay is especially fond of dwarf cryptomerias, such as' Elegans' and' Vilmoriniana', for their wonderful foliage color and texture. The soil is crammed with bulbs, perennials, and woodland ground covers-species primroses and sweet woodruff. Three kinds of bulbs naturalize successfully in the gardensnowflake (Leucojum), Asiatic lilies and Lilium regale, and narcissus in cream, pink, salmon, or white. Hellebores are favorites because of their early bloom, starting in October. The yellow, green, and white flower color of Helleborus niger Potter's Wheel' echoes the flower color of its neighbor Jury's Yellow' camellia. The rest of Barclay's eclectic garden is filled with hundreds of plants. In the backyard over an old plum tree, and a mayten tree supports Cl. Cecile Brunner' ("the trees and shrubs become hat racks"). Also scattered about are fragrant shrubs such as Daphne burkwood Albert Burkwood', D. caucasica, Michelia doltsopa, and wintersweet. "You can hardly see wintersweet's flowers, but one January day walking in the garden an unearthly fragrance floats up in the air and you know it's in bloom." BARClAY'S SECRETS Forget stakes. Plant tall lilies such as Lilium regale behind rhododendrons. Grow clematis on other plants instead of structures. Let rhododendrons support them. Allow purple Clematis' Jackman' to tangle with tall climbing roses, such as apricot yellow' Jaune Desprez'. "You need a clematis you can cut almost to the ground every year or two when cleaning up your roses. C.' Jackman' can easily handle it." The best daphne. D. caucasica. "Sometimes daphnes commit daphnecide, but this one doesn't." The almost better in the Bay Area than in their native climates of Burma and Vietnam. "Favorite: R. nuttall' John Paul Evans'." It has the largest flowers of any rhododendron. "Other top choices are' Mi Amor' and' Else Frye'. Photograph Pure white Rhododendron Helene Schiffner' blooms in front of the rounded blue leaves of Cercidiphyllum magnificum' Pendulum'. Photograph GARDENING IS A MAGNIFICENT OBSESSION." -Michael Barclay, Kensington, California //
Readers' recipes tested in Sunset's kitchens // Sicilian-style Strata Roxanne Chan, Albany, CA Because they can be assembled ahead and baked at the last minute, stratas make great brunch entrees. Roxanne Chan also likes to serve this at lunch or dinner. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 1/4 hours, plus at least 1 hour to chill MAKES: 8 servings 1 loaf (1 Ib.) crusty, Italian-style bread, cut into 1-inch cubes 4 ounces thick-sliced prosciutto or ham, diced 1/4 cup chopped canned roasted red peppers 1/4 cup thinly sliced green onions 1/2 cup grated parmesan cheese 1 can (14 1/2 oz.) chopped tomatoes 1/4 cup pitted black olives, coarsely chopped 1/2cup shredded mozzarella cheese 6 large eggs 3 cups milk 2 teaspoons dried Italian seasoning blend 1/2 teaspoon salt 1/2 teaspoon pepper 1/4 cup chopped parsley 2 tablespoons drained capers 1. Spread half the bread cubes level in a lightly oiled 9- by 13-inch baking dish. Top evenly with prosciutto, peppers, green onions, and parmesan cheese. Spread remaining bread cubes level on top, followed by cheese, and tomatoes are layered with Italian bread in this crusty strata. // 2. In a bowl, whisk eggs, milk, Italian seasoning, salt, and pepper to blend. Pour over layered ingredients. Cover and chill at least 1 hour or up to one day. 3. Bake in a 325degrees regular or convection oven until center of strata is set and top is lightly browned, 40 to 50 minutes. Sprinkle evenly with parsley and capers. Let stand 10 minutes, then cut into squares. Serve warm or at room temperature. Per serving: 362 cal., 35% (126 cal.) from fat; 21 g protein; 14 g fat (6 g sat.); 37 g carbo (2.5 g fiber); 1,179 mg sodium; 193 mg chol. Smoked Salmon Spread Betty Jean Nichols, Eugene, OR Betty Jean Nichols serves this creamy spread with crackers or baguette slices. PREP TIME: About 20 minutes, plus at least 12 hours total to chill MAKES: 3 8 ounces smoked salmon 2 tablespoons dry white wine (optional) 2 tablespoons lemon juice 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill Salt and pepper 1. Line a strainer with cheesecloth and set over a bowl. Place cottage cheese in strainer, cover, and chill at least 8 hours or up to 1 day. Discard liquid. 2. Finely dice about a third of the salmon; coarsely chop remainder. In a blender or food processor, whirl drained cottage cheese, coarsely chopped salmon, wine, lemon juice, and mustard until smooth. Stir in diced salmon, dill, and salt and pepper to taste. 3. Spoon mixture into a bowl, cover, and chill at least 4 hours or up to 2 days. Per serving: 61 cal., 36% (22 cal.) from fat; 8.1 g protein; 2.4 g fat (1.1 g sat.); 1 g carbo (0 g fiber); 606 mg sodium; 9.9 mg chol. Strawberry-Yogurt Pie Andee Zetterbaum, for her mother's birthday one year during a heat wave. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 20 minutes, plus at least 6 hours to chill MAKES: 6 to 8 servings 1 quart fresh strawberries, rinsed and hulled 6 tablespoons sugar 1 envelope (1/4 oz.) unflavored gelatin 2 cups plain whole-milk yogurt 1/2 teaspoon vanilla 1/2 teaspoon grated orange peel 1 graham cracker pie crust (9 in.) 1/2 cup miniature or regular chocolate chips 1. Coarsely chop about half the strawberries, to equal 1 1/2 cups chopped berries (reserve remaining ones for garnish). In a 2- to 3-quart pan over medium heat, stir chopped strawberries, sugar, and gelatin until gelatin and sugar are dissolved and mixture is boiling. Remove from heat and stir in yogurt, vanilla, and orange peel until well blended (chunks of strawberries will be visible). Pour into pie crust. Photograph Smoked salmon spread // 2. Chill until set, at least 6 hours, or cover with plastic wrap and chill up to evenly over top of pie. Slice remaining strawberries. Cut pie into wedges; serve with sliced berries. Per serving: 258 cal., 35% (90 cal.) from fat; 4.6 g protein; 10 g fat (4.1 g sat.); 38 g carbo (3.3 g fiber); 165 mg sodium; 7.4 mg chol. Steamed Chicken with Black Bean Sauce Sandra Machan, Newcastle, WA Sandra Machan's kids love this simple chicken dish so much that she makes it once a week. Chinese salted fermented black beans are sold in Asian markets. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 20 minutes, plus at least 30 minutes to chill MAKES: 2 or 3 servings 1 pound boned, skinned chicken breasts 3 cloves garlic, peeled and minced 1 tablespoon cornstarch 1 tablespoon soy sauce 1 tablespoon oyster sauce 1 1/2 teaspoons sugar 1 teaspoon vegetable oil 1 tablespoon Chinese salted fermented black beans (see note above), rinsed, drained, and minced 1/2 teaspoon salt 3 cups hot cooked long-grain white rice the grain into 1/4-inch-thick slices. In a bowl, mix garlic, cornstarch, soy sauce, oyster sauce, sugar, oil, fermented black beans, and salt until well blended. Add chicken and turn to coat. Cover and chill 30 minutes. 2. Meanwhile, in an 8- to 10-quart pan or a 14-inch wok, set a rack over at least 1 inch of water. Bring to a boil over high heat. Pour chicken and marinade into a shallow, rimmed pan or a heatproof dish that fits into the larger pan and place on rack. Cover the larger pan and steam until chicken slices are opaque in the center (cut to test), about 10 minutes. 3. Carefully lift pan with chicken off rack. Spoon chicken mixture onto plates and serve rice alongside. Per serving: 422 cal., 9% (37 cal.) from fat; 41 g protein; 4.1 g fat (0.8 g sat.); 52 g carbo (0.7 g fiber); 1,018 mg sodium Lenore Klass, Koloa, HI Lenore Klass came up with this recipe to use leftover barbecued sausages and Maui sweet onions. She liked the result so much that now she regularly broils sausages and onions to make this potato salad. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 hour MAKES: 6 to 8 servings 8 ounces green beans, rinsed, ends trimmed, and cut in 1-inch pieces 3 pounds Yukon Gold or thin-skinned potatoes, scrubbed and cut into 1-inch chunks 2 tablespoons olive oil 2 tablespoons brown sugar 1 sweet onion such as Maui, Vidalia, or Oso (about 8 oz.), peeled and sliced crosswise 1 inch thick 2 fully cooked sausages (about 10 oz. total) 1/4 cup mayonnaise 1 1/2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 1/3 cup balsamic vinegar 1/3 cup pitted black olives, coarsely chopped 1/4 cup minced parsley Salt and pepper 1. In a 6- to 8-quart pan over high heat, bring 3 quarts water to a boil. Add beans and cook until crisp-tender, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove beans from cold running water until cool. Return water to a boil. Add potatoes, reduce heat as necessary to maintain a simmer, and cook until potatoes are tender when pierced, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain. 2. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, mix olive oil and brown sugar. Place onion slices and sausages on a baking sheet and brush generously with brown sugar mixture. Broil 6 inches from heat until onions and sausages are lightly browned and onions are tender when pierced, 8 to 10 minutes. Let stand until cool enough to handle. Coarsely chop onion. Slice sausages 1/2 inch thick. 3. In a large bowl, combine beans, potatoes, onion, sausages, mayonnaise, mustard, vinegar, olives, and parsley. Mix gently to coat, adding salt and pepper to taste. Serve warm, or chill until cold, about 2 hours. Per serving: 299 cal., 63% (189 cal.) from fat; 11 g protein; 21 g fat (5.2 g); 629 mg sodium; 33 mg chol. Sidebar Share your Sunset favorites Is there a Sunset recipe you use as a great weeknight solution for family dinners? We'd love to know about it. In an upcoming story, we'll publish readers' favorite Sunset recipes for midweek, together with your tips for getting a great dinner on the table fast. If you've adapted one of our recipes for your tastes or to save time, we want to hear your ideas. Send us the title and a description of your weeknight favorite, along with the approximate date it ran in Sunset (if you know it). Tell us about your weeknight routine, and include a picture of your family if possible. If we use your suggestion, you will receive a one-year subscription to Sunset, as well as a copy of our most recent Recipe Annual. Submit your ideas by September 1, 2003, by sending them to weeknight@ sunset.com or Weeknight Recipes, Sunset Magazine, 80 Willow Rd., address and phone number. Sidebar Share a recipe Have you created or adapted a special recipe-a family favorite, travel discovery, or time-saver-you'd like to share with other readers? Send it to us, with the story behind the recipe, and you'll received a "Great Cook" certificate and $75 for each recipe published. Go to **32;1881;TOOLONG or write to Kitchen Cabinet, Sunset Magazine, 80 Willow Rd., Menlo Park, CA 94025. //
Cook the best dishes from Sunset's $50,000 recipe contest Photograph For originality-a and because we couldn't stop eating it-this sweet potato cheesecake took our grand prize. // Thanksgiving dinner tastes a little different in the West than around the rest of the country. The veggies are more likely to be fresh, the dressing might contain anything from sourdough bread to Chinese sausage, and sweet potatoes rarely sport marshmallows. With Safeway as our partner, we held our biggest Thanksgiving recipe contest ever at Sunset this year; more than 6,500 entries came in. The winners-from all over the West, including Hawaii-reflect our region's diversity and creativity. The winning dressing is a Southwestern mix of cornbread and chorizo. Our top appetizer is built around wild Northwest salmon. Kabocha squash becomes a serving bowl for vegetables. Fresh herbs are steeped in a cocktail. And sweet potatoes find their way into the grand prize winner, the best cheesecake you'll ever eat. Photograph Grand Prize BEST DESERT Roasted-Sweet Potato Cheesecake with Maple Cream First Place BEST TURKEY Dry-Cured Rosemary Turkey Second Place BEST SIDE DISH BEST BEVERAGE Herbaltini BEST DRESSING Southwest Cornbread and Chorizo Dressing BEST APPETIZER Northwest Smoked Salmon Crpes // How the contest worked We asked for your best original Thanksgiving recipes in six categories. Based on their originality, taste, ease of preparation, and visual appeal, the entries were first screened by former Sunset food editors and writers for 100 of the most promising in each category. Then our current food editors and writers narrowed each field to the top 20 to 40 dishes, which our retesters cooked in Sunset's test kitchen-213 in all. We tasted Thanksgiving dinner for 10 weeks straight, scoring each dish, and then judged the finalists in each category side by side to pick the winners. Our thanks to all contestants for a delicious and creative Thanksgiving summer-we're looking forward to enjoying the holiday all over again this month. CATEGORIES Beverages Appetizers Turkeys Dressings Side Dishes Desserts PRIZES The winner in each category received a trip to Sunset's headquarters for a special harvest dinner. And, with Safeway's support, the top makeover and Safeway or Vons groceries for a year FIRST PLACE: $5,000 SECOND PLACE: $1,000 gift certificate to Safeway or Vons THIRD PLACE: One-year membership in the Sunset Wine Club Third Place BEST BEVERAGE CARRY PORTER, KIRKLAND, WA Herbaltini She wasn't willing to miss out on a moment of the party by making cocktails one by one, so Carry Porter created her "herbaltini" in a pitcher. This refreshing drink "combines the fresh herbs that many people have left over after cooking holiday dishes," she explains. PREP TIME: About 20 minutes MAKES: 1 quarts; 8 to 12 servings NOTES: Crushed mint turns dark after about 20 minutes. If you'd like to make this drink up to 4 hours ahead, strain the mixture just before your guests arrive, return it to the pitcher, then add a handful of fresh mint leaves. 24 fresh mint sprigs (4 in. each), rinsed 12 fresh rosemary sprigs (3 in. each), rinsed cup superfine sugar 2 oranges and quartered 2 cups gin, chilled in the freezer 1 cup plus 2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (from about 7 limes), chilled 1 cups soda water, chilled Fresh mint leaves, rinsed 1. In a 2 - to 3-quart pitcher, combine mint sprigs, rosemary sprigs, and sugar. With a long-handled wooden spoon, muddle (or crush) the herbs and sugar together. Squeeze juice from oranges into pitcher, then drop quarters in. Press a few times with spoon to release oil from orange peels. Stir in gin, lime juice, and cup ice water. Mix until sugar is dissolved. Serve (see step 2), or cover and chill up to 4 hours (see notes). If using martini glasses, chill in freezer. 2. To serve, slowly pour chilled soda water into the pitcher, down the side. Stir gently to blend. Pour through a strainer into chilled martini glasses or ice-filled glasses. Float a mint leaf on top of each. Serve (0.9 col.) from fat; 0.2 g protein; 0.1 g fat (0 g sat.); 1 6 g carbo (0.1 g fiber); 1.1 mg sodium; 0 mg chol. BEST APPETIZER NANCYHESS, PORTLAND Northwest Smoked Salmon Crpes "A holiday in our house is not complete without these crpes," says Nancy Hess, who smokes local salmon herself for the filling. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 2 hours MAKES: 3 to 3 dozen NOTES: Hot-smoked salmon is firmer and flakier than cold-smoked salmon (lox). You can make the crpes themselves up to 3 days ahead; cover and chill. Let warm to room temperature before separating. You can fill the crpes (through step 3) up to 1 day ahead; cover and chill. Crpes (recipe follows) 5 ounces hot-smoked salmon (see notes) 2/3 cup mayonnaise 1/3 cup sour cream 1 cup shredded parmesan cheese 2 teaspoons lemon juice teaspoon Worcestershire teaspoon chopped fresh dill 1/8 teaspoon white pepper 1/8 teaspoon hot sauce, rinsed 1. Stack 2 crpes and, with a 2 - to 3-inch round cookie cutter, cut into closely spaced rounds. Repeat to cut remaining crpes; discard scraps. 2. Preheat oven to 350. Remove skin and bones from salmon. With your hands, break salmon into fine pieces; you should have about 1 cup. In a bowl, mix mayonnaise, sour cream, cup parmesan cheese, lemon juice, Worcestershire, chopped dill, white pepper, and hot sauce. Stir in the salmon and seasoned salt to taste. Photograph Northwest Smoked Salmon Crpes // 3. Mound about 1 teaspoons of the salmon filling on one half of each crpe round; fold it over to make a half-moon shape. Set crpes, slightly overlapping, in a buttered 10- by 15-inch baking pan. Drizzle with melted butter and sprinkle with remaining cup cheese and a little paprika. 4. Bake until crpes are golden and bubbly, 15 to 25 minutes. Transfer to a serving platter or plates and garnish 71% (54 cal.) from fat; 3.3 g protein; 6 g fat (2.2 g sat.); 3.1 g carbo (0.1 g fiber); 1 12 mg sodium; 26 mg chol. Crpes. In a blender, combine 3 large eggs, 1 cup milk, 1 cup all-purpose flour, and 2 tablespoons melted butter; whirl until smooth. Set a 10-inch nonstick frying pan over medium to medium-high heat. When hot, coat lightly with melted butter. Immediately pour 1/3 cup crpe batter into hot pan and tilt to coat bottom. If there are a few holes, drizzle with a little batter to fill in. Cook crpe until edge is lightly browned and surface looks dry, 30 to 60 seconds. Run a spatula under crpe edge to loosen. Turn over and brown other side lightly, 10 to 20 seconds. Tip pan over a plate to release crpe. Repeat to cook remaining batter, stacking cooked crpes. Makes 7 to 11 crpes. Photograph // First Place BEST The dry-cure for this turkey was born during a party-advice phone call Helena Darling had with her bachelor brother in Hollywood. It reflects her idea of Thanksgiving dinner- "an earthy feast that acknowledges our farm-to-table roots," she says. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 3 hours, plus 3 days to cure MAKES: About 14 servings (with leftovers) NOTES: Use a turkey that hasn't been infused with broth or butter. 3 tablespoons sea salt or kosher salt 3 tablespoons dried marjoram 3 tablespoons dried thyme 3 tablespoons dried juniper berries 1 tablespoon black peppercorns 2 teaspoons anise seeds 1 turkey (14 to 15 lb.) 12 fresh rosemary sprigs (3 in. each) 12 cloves garlic, peeled cup (lb.) unsalted butter, at room temperature Pan gravy (recipe follows) 1. Three days before serving, in a blender or spice grinder, finely grind salt, marjoram, thyme, juniper berries, peppercorns, and anise seeds. 2. Remove and discard leg truss from turkey. Pull off neck; save neck for gravy. Rinse turkey inside and out; pat dry. Cut off wing tips to the first joint and reserve for gravy. Rub half the herb mixture all over turkey; sprinkle remaining in body cavity. Cover and chill for 3 days. 3. Preheat oven to 325 (convection not recommended). Put rosemary sprigs and garlic inside turkey body cavity. Gently push your hand between skin and turkey breast to separate skin from breast. Spread about half the butter over breast under skin. Melt remaining butter and brush lightly over top of turkey. Coat a V-shaped rack with cooking-oil spray and set in a 12- by 17-inch roasting pan. Place turkey, breast down, on the rack. Roast turkey for 1 hours. 4. Meanwhile, cook turkey wing tips and neck for pan gravy (recipe follows). Remove turkey from oven and turn breast side up. Return to oven. Roast until a meat thermometer inserted straight down through thickest part of breast to the bone. Tip turkey to drain juices from cavity into pan and transfer to a platter. Let stand in a warm place, uncovered, for 15 to 30 minutes. Finish gravy, then carve turkey. Per serving: 420 cal., 41% (171 cal.) from fat; 57 g protein; 19 g fat (5.7 g sat); 1.7 g carbo (0.2 g fiber); sodium (N/A); 167 mg chol. Pan gravy. Pour 2 tablespoons vegetable oil into a 5- to 6-quart pan over medium-high heat. Add turkey wing tips and neck and brown well, 4 to 7 minutes. Add 4 cups low-sodium chicken broth and bring to a boil; cover, reduce heat, and simmer about 1 hour. Remove wings and neck. While roasted turkey rests, pour pan juices into a 1- to 2-quart glass measure. Skim off and reserve fat. Add turkey wing broth to make 4 cups; if you don't have enough, add water. Return 1/3 cup fat (peeled and minced garlic to unwashed roasting pan; set over two medium-hot burners. Add cup all-purpose flour and stir until bubbly and smooth. Stir in the 4 cups broth and 1 cup whipping cream; scrape pan sides and bottom to loosen browned bits. Whisk gravy until smooth and boiling, 4 to 7 minutes. Add salt to taste. Makes about 5 cups. Per -cup serving: 86 col., 80% (69 col.) from fat; 1.3 g protein; 7.7 g fat (3.2 g sat); 2.8 g carbo (0.1 g fiber); sodium (N/A); 15 mg chol. BEST DRESSING VICTORIA JOHNSON, GILBERT, AZ Southwest Cornbread and Chorizo Dressing When Victoria Johnson moved to Arizona, she created a dressing to introduce Southwest flavors to some out-of-state relatives "who didn't even know what chorizo was," she says. "They loved it." PREP AND COOK TIME: About 2 hours MAKES: 10 to 12 servings NOTES: Choose lean chorizo in natural casings You can prepare the dressing through step 4 up to 1 day ahead; cover and chill chorizo mixture, and store cornbread airtight at room temperature. Before continuing with step 5, let chorizo mixture stand at room temperature about 30 minutes. 1 butternut squash (1 to 1 lb.) 2 tablespoons firmly packed dark brown sugar 1 onion (6 oz.) 1 red bell pepper (8 oz.) 1 fresh fennel head (9 oz.) 1 pound mushrooms 1 pound chorizo sausage (see notes) cup (1/8 lb.) unsalted butter cup chopped fresh cilantro 1 tablespoon chopped fresh sage leaves 1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme leaves 2 large eggs 1 cup fat-skimmed chicken broth Cornbread (recipe follows) 1. Peel and seed squash. Cut into 1-inch chunks; you should have about 3 cups. In a 3- to 4-quart pan over high heat, combine cup water with brown sugar and the squash. Bring to a boil, cover, reduce heat to medium, and cook, stirring once, until squash is Uncover and cook, occasionally stirring gently, until most of the water is evaporated, 3 to 5 minutes longer. Remove from heat and let cool. 2. Peel and chop onion. Rinse, stem, seed, and chop bell pepper. Rinse fennel and trim off and discard base of head and tough stalks. Chop enough fennel to make about 1 cup. Rinse mushrooms and slice inch thick. 3. Squeeze sausage from casings and break into chunks into a 12-inch frying pan or 5- to 6-quart pan over mediumhigh heat; stir often until lightly browned and crumbly, 7 to 10 minutes. Pour sausage into a wire strainer to drain; discard fat. 4. Preheat oven to 350. Add butter to unwashed pan over medium-high heat; when melted, add onion, bell pepper, and fennel and stir often until vegetables begin to soften, 7 to 8 minutes. Add mushrooms and stir until limp, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat and stir in sausage, cilantro, sage, large bowl, whisk together eggs and broth. Break cornbread into -inch chunks and drop into bowl. Add sausage mixture and stir gently to combine. Scrape dressing into a buttered 9- by 13-inch baking dish and cover with foil. 6. Bake until hot in the center, 40 to 50 minutes. Uncover and bake until top is crisp and golden brown, 10 to 15 minutes longer. Per serving: 464 col., 48% (225 cal.) from fat; log protein; 25 g fat (10 g sat); 43 g carbo (3.2 g fiber); 853 mg sodium; 117 mg chol. Cornbread. Preheat oven to 400. In a bowl, mix 2 boxes (8 oz. each) corn muffin mix, cup milk, and 2 large eggs until blended but still slightly lumpy. Pour batter into a buttered 9- by 13-inch baking pan. Bake until top is golden brown, 15 to 20 minutes. Let cornbread cool in pan on a rack. Second Place BEST SIDE Bowl with Autumn Vegetables When Kristine Snyder saw kabocha squash on sale, she imagined a multicultural twist on the more common soup-in-a-squash bowl: She turned the kabocha into a sort of Moroccan tagine for fall vegetables and added an Asian-flavored sauce. The medley would also make a good vegetarian main course. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 hour MAKES: About 10 servings NOTES: If you want to get a head start on this dish, cut and prepare the vegetables and squash up to 1 day ahead; cover and chill. Cook vegetables shortly before serving. 1 kabocha squash (4 to 5 lb.) 3 tablespoons olive oil Salt and pepper 2 onions (6 oz. each) 1 pound green beans red bell pepper (4 oz. total) 7 tablespoons butter 3 cloves garlic, peeled and minced 2 tablespoons mirin (sweet sake or sweet cooking rice wine) or cream sherry 2 tablespoons soy sauce 1 tablespoon Worcestershire teaspoon ground cumin teaspoon cayenne 1. Preheat oven to 375. Rinse squash and pat dry. lid and scrape out and discard seeds. Brush interior of squash and inside of lid with 1 tablespoon olive oil. Sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper. Set lid on squash and place in a 10- by 15-inch baking pan. Bake for 10 minutes. 2. Meanwhile, peel onions and cut lengthwise into -inch-wide wedges. Brush onions with remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil and sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper. Arrange onions around squash and return to oven. Bake until squash and onions are tender when pierced, 25 to 30 minutes for onions and 35 to 40 minutes for squash; remove when done. 3. Meanwhile, rinse green beans and trim off ends; cut into about 3-inch lengths. Rinse, stem, and seed bell pepper half; cut into -inch-wide strips about 2 inches long. 4. Put butter in a 1- to 2-quart pan over medium-low heat; when it begins to melt, add garlic and stir occasionally until butter is melted, about 1 minute. Whisk in mirin, soy, whisking often, to blend flavors, 1 to 2 minutes. Pour into a bowl or small pitcher. 5. Shortly before serving, in a 4- to 5-quart pan over high heat, bring about 2 quarts water to a boil. Add beans and red pepper; cook just until crisptender to bite, 4 to 5 minutes. Drain well and season to taste with salt and pepper. 6. Transfer squash bowl to a serving bowl or platter. Gut it-down to but not through the base-into 10 wedges for a flower-like presentation; for a bowl shape, cut the squash threequarters of die way to the bottom. Mound green bean-red pepper mixture and roasted onions in the center. Drizzle cup of the mirin-soy mixture over the vegetables. Reserve the squash lid for another use or for a decorative top for the bowl. Offer remaining sauce to add to taste. Per serving: 200 col., 59% (117 col.) from fat; 3.6 g protein; 13 g fat (5.6 g sat.) 314 mg sodium; 22 mg chol. DRESSING RUNNER-UP LYNN LLOYD, SANTA CRUZ, CA Basmati Rice Dressing with Dried Fruit, Toasted Almonds, and Coconut A longtime maker of traditional Indian pilafs, Lynn Lloyd wanted to create a special one a couple of years ago. Her family all stood around the stove with forks, tasting and suggesting. "After I added the cinnamon, everyone said,' Stop! This is it. '" PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 hours MAKES: 10 to 12 servings NOTES: You can prepare this dressing through step 4 up to 1 day ahead; cover and chill. To reheat, let dressing stand at room temperature for 1 hour, then bake, covered, in a 350 oven until hot, about 1 hour. 2 cups brown basmati rice 2 cups dried apricots, cut into quarters 1 cup dried sweetened cranberries 1 cup dried unsweetened flaked coconut 2 cups slivered almonds cup (3/8 lb.) butter 2 cups chopped onion cup chopped red bell pepper 2 teaspoons minced garlic 2 teaspoons curry powder 2 teaspoons ground cumin 2 teaspoons salt 1 teaspoon pepper 1 teaspoon ground cardamom 1 teaspoon grated orange peel 1 teaspoon grated lime peel teaspoon ground cinnamon 1. Preheat oven to 350. In a 2- to 2 -quart pan over high heat, bring 3 cups water and the rice to a boil. Reduce heat to low, cover, and simmer until water is absorbed and rice is tender to bite, about 45 minutes. 2. Meanwhile, in a bowl, combine dried apricots and cranberries. Cover with boiling water and let stand until fruit is plump, about 15 minutes. Drain. 3. Place coconut and almonds in two separate 10- by 15-inch baking pans. Bake, stirring occasionally, until golden, 4 to 5 minutes for coconut, 8 to 10 minutes for almonds. Photograph Basmati Rice Dressing with Dried Fruit, Toasted Almonds, and Coconut // 4. In a 6- to 8-quart pan over mediumhigh heat, melt butter. Add onion and red, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium and add ginger, garlic, curry powder, cumin, salt, pepper, cardamom, orange peel, lime peel, and cinnamon; stir just until spices are aromatic, about 30 seconds. Remove from heat. Stir in cooked rice, dried fruit, almonds, and coconut. Spoon into a shallow 3-quart baking dish and cover with foil. 5. Bake until hot in the center, about 30 minutes. Per serving: 481 ml., 52% (252 cal.) from fat; 8.9 g protein; 28 g fat (1 I g sat); 54 g carbo (4.2 g fiber); 514 mg sodium; 31 mg chol. SIDE DISH RUNNER-UP CAROLE MCDONALD, MILWAUKIE, OR Poached Pear, Macadamia, and Spinach Salad with Goat Cheese The McDonald family loves wine-poached pears for dessert. With a can of honey-roasted macadamias on hand from a recent trip to Hawaii, plus some tangy goat cheese and spinach, Carole McDonald decided to put TIME: About 1 hours MAKES: About 12 servings NOTES: You can poach the pears up to 3 days ahead; leave in liquid, cover, and chill. The leftover poaching liquid is great in other dishes: Boil it, uncovered, over high heat until reduced by about half, about 25 minutes. Pour through a wire strainer. Cool, cover, and chill up to 1 month. Add a spoonful to glasses of sparkling wine for an aperitif or spoon over vanilla ice cream and berries for dessert. Poached pears (recipe follows) 6 quarts baby spinach leaves (18 oz.), rinsed and crisped 1 jar (6 oz.; 1 cups) plain roasted, roasted and salted, or honey-roasted macadamia nuts 4 ounces fresh chvre (goat cheese) cup mild olive oil 3 tablespoons rice vinegar 1 tablespoon whole-grain mustard 1 tablespoon honey 1 tablespoon dried thyme Salt and pepper cup pomegranate seeds (optional) 1. With a slotted spoon, lift pears from poaching liquid; reserve liquid.. Photograph Poached Pear, Macadamia, and Spinach Salad with Goat Cheese // 2. In a large bowl, combine pears with spinach and macadamia nuts. Coarsely crumble half the cheese over salad. 3. In a small bowl, whisk together olive oil, rice vinegar, 3 tablespoons reserved pear-poaching liquid (save remaining for another use; see notes), mustard, honey, and thyme. Pour over salad and gently mix to coat, adding salt and pepper to taste. Sprinkle with pomegranate seeds and crumble remaining cheese over salad. Per serving: 249 cal., 69% (171 cal.) from fat; 4.2 g protein; 19 g fat (3.7 g sot); 20 g carbo (3.8 g fiber); 132 mg sodium; 4.3 mg chol. Poached pears. In a 5- to 6-quart pan over medium heat, combine 1 bottle (750 ml.) dry red wine, cup sugar, 1 thin strip (3 in. by in.) lemon peel (yellow part only), 1 cinnamon stick, 3 in.), and 1 vanilla bean (6 in.), split lengthwise. Bring to a simmer. Meanwhile, peel 3 firm-ripe Anjou pears (1 lb. total), cut in half lengthwise, and core. Place pears in wine mixture. Cover and simmer, turning occasionally, until pears are barely tender when pierced, about 15 minutes. Remove from heat and let pears cool in liquid, turning occasionally, at least 30 minutes, or cover and chill up to 3 days. SIDE DISH RUNNER-UP DOROTHY REINHOLD, MALIBU, CA Fresh Cranberry-Ginger Relish "I'm the candied ginger queen," says Dorothy Reinhold. "Many things are improved by ginger. Cranberry sauce can be a one-trick pony-all sweetness and not much else. But if you add something with bite, suddenly you have an adventurous meal on your plate." PREP TIME: About 10 minutes MAKES: About 3 cups; 12 servings NOTES: You can make this relish up to 3 days ahead; 3 cups) fresh cranberries 1 lemon (5 oz.), rinsed 2/3 cup sugar cup crystallized ginger, coarsely chopped teaspoon ground ginger 1. Rinse and drain cranberries. Remove and discard any bruised or soft ones. Gently pat berries dry. 2. With a vegetable peeler, pare all the yellow peel (not the white pith) from lemon in thin strips; coarsely chop. Save lemon for other uses. 3. In a food processor, whirl cranberries, lemon peel, sugar, crystallized ginger, and ground ginger just until finely chopped. Cover and chill at least 4 hours. Per -cup serving: 93 col., 1% (0.9 col.) from fat; 0.1 g protein; 0.1 g fat (0 g sat); 24 g carbo (1.4 g fiber); 8.6 mg sodium; 0 mg chol. Grand Prize BEST DESSERT KARI BOWERS, BELLEVUE, WA Roasted-Sweet Potato Cheesecake with Maple Cream "My two sons, ages 10 and 12, normally don't like sweet potatoes the potatoes for deeper flavor and then putting them into a cheesecake would change things. Many trials later, she came up with this recipe, which the whole family loves. In our test kitchen, it produced a luscious, silky texture every time-and rave reviews from our entire staff. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 2 hours, plus at least 2 hours to cool and chill MAKES: 12 to 16 servings NOTES: You can make this cheesecake up to 3 days ahead; cover and chill. Garnish with cream up to 6 hours before serving; cover and chill until serving. 2 dark orange-fleshed sweet potatoes (1 to 1 lb. total), such as jewel or red garnet (sometimes sold as yams) 1 tablespoon melted butter Pecan crust (recipe follows) 2 teaspoons lemon juice 3 packages (8 oz. each) cream cheese, regular or light (neufchtel), at room temperature cup granulated sugar cup firmly packed brown sugar 4 large eggs cup whipping cream cup sour cream cup maple syrup ginger Maple cream (recipe follows) 1. Preheat oven to 375 (convection not recommended). Peel sweet potatoes and cut in half lengthwise. Place in a 9- by 13-inch baking pan and brush with melted butter. Bake until potatoes are soft when pressed, 45 to 55 minutes. 2. Meanwhile, prepare crust. Bake in same oven with potatoes until lightly browned all over, 10 to 12 minutes. 3. Scrape any charred spots off potatoes, then cut potatoes into chunks. Whirl in a food processor or mash in a bowl with lemon juice until smooth. Reserve 1 cup; save any extra for another use. 4. Reduce oven temperature to 325. In a bowl, with a mixer on high speed, beat cream cheese until fluffy. Gradually beat in granulated and brown sugars, scraping down sides of bowl occasionally, until mixture is well blended and smooth. Beat in eggs, one at a time, until blended. Add reserved sweet potato mixture, the whipping cream, and ginger. Mix on low speed until well blended. 5. Wrap bottom of cheesecake pan with heavy-duty foil, pressing it up the sides. Pour batter over crust. Put cheesecake pan in a 12- by 15-inch roasting pan at least 2 inches deep. Set pans in oven and pour enough boiling water into roasting pan to come halfway up sides of cheesecake pan. 6. Bake until cake barely jiggles in the center when gently shaken, about 55 minutes. Remove pans from oven. Lift cheesecake pan from roasting pan and let cool completely on a rack, about 1 hour, then chill until cold, at least 1 hours, or up to 3 days (cover once cold). 7. Up to 6 hours before serving, cut around inside of pan rim to release cake; remove rim. With a pastry bag, pipe dollops of maple cream onto cake. Or serve maple cream separately, to spoon onto each wedge. Per serving: 418 col., 60% (252 col. fat (16 g sat.); 38 g carbo (1 g fiber); 239 mg sodium; 130 mg chol. Pecan crust. Whirl cup coarsely chopped pecans in a blender until finely ground; you should have cup. In a bowl, mix pecans, 1 cups fine graham cracker crumbs, 2 tablespoons sugar, and 5 tablespoons melted butter. Pour into a 9-inch cheesecake pan with removable rim (2 in. tall). Press mixture evenly over bottom of pan. Maple cream. In a bowl, with a mixer on high speed, beat cup whipping cream until stiff peaks form. On low speed, beat in cup maple syrup just until blended. DESSERT RUNNER-UP KATHY MASUR, BROOMFIELD, CO Praline Pumpkin Torte This showstopping dessert came from Kathy Masur's Aunt Katy-" a wonder in the kitchen. "Although her aunt passed away years ago, Masur still makes the pumpkin torte every year as a tribute. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 hour, plus 1 hours to cool bake the cakes (through step 3) up to 1 day ahead; cover and store at room temperature. Up to 6 hours ahead, assemble layers; cover with a large inverted bowl or pan and chill. cup firmly packed brown sugar 1/3 cup butter 3 tablespoons plus 1 cups whipping cream 1 cup chopped pecans 4 large eggs 1 2/3 cups granulated sugar 1 cup vegetable oil 2 cups canned cooked pumpkin 1 teaspoon vanilla 2 cups all-purpose flour 2 teaspoons baking powder 2 teaspoons pumpkin pie spice (or teaspoon each ground cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg) 1 teaspoon baking soda 1 teaspoon salt cup powdered sugar 1. Preheat oven to 350. Butter two 9-inch round cake pans. Line bottoms of pans with cooking parchment. In a heavy 1- to 2-quart pan over low heat, stir brown sugar, butter, and 3 tablespoons whipping cream until melted and blended, about 5 minutes. Pour half the brown sugar mixture into each of the cake pans. Sprinkle cup chopped pecans evenly into pans. 2 eggs, granulated sugar, and oil until well blended. Stir in pumpkin and teaspoon vanilla. In a bowl, whisk together flour, baking powder, pumpkin pie spice, baking soda, and salt to blend. Whisk dry ingredients into pumpkin mixture until well blended. Pour half the batter into each of the pans; smooth top. 3. Bake until a toothpick inserted in center of cakes comes out clean, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool in pans on racks about 5 minutes, then invert onto racks and remove pans and paper. Let cool completely, about 1 hours. 4. Up to 6 hours before serving, in a bowl, with an electric mixer on high speed, beat remaining 1 cups whipping cream until soft peaks form. On low speed, beat in powdered sugar and remaining teaspoon vanilla just until blended. Set one cake layer, pecan praline side up, on a serving platter. Spread two-thirds of the whipped cream mixture over the top. Set second layer, whipped cream mixture. Sprinkle with remaining cup chopped pecans. Per serving; 676 cal., 59% (396 cal.) from fat; 6.3 g protein; 44 g fat (14 g sat.); 66 g carbo (2 g fiber); 481 mg sodium; 129 mg chol. DESSERT RUNNER-UP EDWINA GADSBY, GREAT FALLS, MT Pumpkin Chai Pots de Crme Last year, inspired by the popularity of Starbucks' pumpkin lattes, Edwina Gadsby decided to incorporate those flavors into her favorite dessert, pot de crme. "My sister Leanne, a huge chai fan, suggested I try it with chai instead of coffee, and everyone loved it," she says. PREP AND COOK TIME: About 1 hours, plus 1 hours to cool and chill MAKES: 6 servings NOTES: You can make the custards and pumpkin seed brittle up to 1 day ahead. Cover and chill custards; store brittle airtight at room temperature. 1 cup whipping cream 1 cup whole milk cup firmly packed light brown sugar pumpkin 1/3 cup chai tea concentrate or strong brewed chai tea 2 teaspoons grated orange peel or Meyer lemon peel 1 teaspoon vanilla Pumpkin seed brittle (recipe follows) 1. Preheat oven to 325 (convection not recommended). In a 2- to 3-quart pan over medium heat, stir cream, milk, and brown sugar until sugar is dissolved, 2 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat. Photograph Pumpkin Chai Pots de Crme // 2. In a bowl, whisk egg yolks until light yellow. Add granulated sugar and whisk until blended. Gradually whisk a fourth of the hot cream mixture into the egg mixture. Then slowly whisk in remaining cream mixture and the pumpkin, chai, orange peel, and vanilla. 3. Divide mixture among six ramekins (cup). Set in a 12- by 16-inch roasting pan at least 2 inches deep. Set pan in oven and pour in boiling water to halfway up sides of ramekins. 4. Bake until custards barely jiggle when gently shaken, 45 to 50 minutes racks for 30 minutes, then chill until cold, at least 1 hour. Cover when cold. 5. Shortly before serving, garnish with shards of pumpkin seed brittle. Per serving: 382 cal., 57% (216 cal.) from fat; 8 g protein; 24 g fat (11 g sat.); 35 g carbo (0.7 g fiber); 48 mg sodium; 263 mg chol. Pumpkin seed brittle. In a heavy 6- to 8-inch frying pan over medium-high heat, stir 1/3 cup sugar and cup water until sugar is dissolved, 1 to 2 minutes. Cook without stirring, shaking pan often, until mixture is a deep amber color, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat and stir in cup hulled roasted pumpkin seeds (sometimes sold as pepitas). Pour onto a 12- by 15-inch piece of buttered foil and spread thin. Let cool until hard, 6 to 10 minutes. Cut or break britde into about -inch shards. Store airtight, if not using at once one side dish that cbuld steal the whole show Photograph Roasted Kabocha Squash Bowl with Autumn Vegetables Sidebar Sweet and tangy veggies become a centerpiece you can eat Photograph Praline Pumpkin Tarte Sidebar An old-fashioned cake gets a fresh, casual look //
On Orcas, the jewel, of the San Juans the journey from farm to table is short and sweety // THE PLUMS, dusky and warm from the sun art steadily disappearing under my greedy fingers. The lamb has just come off the grill; my husband is slicing the tomatoes we bought at the market that morning. I'm assembling the salad for our impromptu dinner party-a bowl of Maple Rock Farm lettuces with blue cheese and a simple dressing. "This could be the best trip my stomach's ever taken," my husband says with a contented sigh, surveying the feast on our backyard picnic table. Mouth full of plum, I find it hard to disagree. We've rented a house for a lazy week on Orcas Island, possibly the loveliest of the populated landmasses in Washington's San Juan archipelago. Our turn-of-the-century cottage faces south over East Sound, with a wide deck and a narrow path leading to a steep and rocky beach. We hadn't planned to base our entire vacation around our appetites. But after finding a map of a week's worth of visits. For anyone who loves to cook, it's a seductive prospect: preparing your meals in a beautiful setting with ingredients purchased from the source. As foodie tourism goes, Orcas is one of the West's most enchanting options. Settlers have farmed the island since the 1870s, but only recently have they begun to organize themselves for visitors-setting up on-site produce stands, permaculture classes, even an informal petting zoo. At the Saturday farmers' market, lines form for Armand Bryl, the master Swiss baker, and Rob Kirby, who sells barbecued oysters along with his own roasted coffee and hand-blended spices. The farmers themselves are a modern breed. Take John Steward, a former snowboard apparel company co-owner from Oregon, who started Maple Rock Farm six years ago. The sign on his vintage milk truck reads KNOW YOUR FARMER, KNOW YOUR FOOD. "It's not just about organic anymore-it's about authenticity," he says. At the 56 year old Coffelts Farm,, as well as wool comforters and Sidney Coffelt's superlative seasonal plum-lime marmalade. "We like to say they only have one bad day in their lives," she says, with an affectionate glance at her sheep. We eat out just once that week-at the very fine Christina's, where Maple Rock Farm's heirloom tomatoes and salad greens make a star appearance. Chef-owner Christina Orchid intro duces me to her mother, 87-year-old Emily Reid, who with her husband maintained one of the island's main apple orchards in the 1950s. On our last day, we visit Reid's roadside stand to marvel at the bounty from her garden: golden raspberries, dahlias, tomatillos, peas. She laughs as I take my first taste of ground cherry - a sweet yellow fruit enclosed in 3 papery husk. I can already feel the pull this island has on me, and how much I will miss it when I'm gone. I think of John Steward sailing in for a quick stop at the market and take to make the leap? I tell Emily Reid how lucky she is to live here, and she gives me an indulgent look. "It's not luck," she says. "You have to earn it." Sidebar Find your own little cabin by the waterthere are plenty to rent-and savor the bounty on Orcas Island. OPPOSITE, CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT Fresh greens at the Saturday market; Westsound plums; Vern Coffelt and his flock; a vacation rental at Grindstone Harbor. Sidebar As foodie tourism goes, Orcas is one of the West's most enchanting options The recipes Here are three market-fresh dishes inspired by the bounty of Orcas island. Grilled leg of lamb with yogurt-mint sauce Christina Orchid ties her lamb; we like leaving it untied too, so it cooks faster and gets nicely charred-and we add a tangy sauce. PREP AND COOK TIME About 1 hours, plus 2 hours for chilling MAKES 8 to 10 servings 1 yellow onion (6 oz.), peeled and quartered 7 cloves garlic 2 tsp. salt 2/3 cup olive oil 1 leg of lamb (4 to 5 lbs.), boned, butterflied, and trimmed of fat 1 red onion (6 oz.), peeled and thinly sliced 2 bunches radishes, rinsed and trimmed Yogurt-mint sauce (recipe follows) 1. In a blender, whirl yellow onion, garlic, rosemary, lemon juice, and salt. With blender running, slowly pour in olive oil. 2. Rinse lamb and pat dry. With a small knife, make small slashes (1 in. long, 1 in. deep) all over the lamb, and put it in a nonreactive dish. Coat lamb with onion marinade, making sure the mixture gets into the slits. Cover and chill 2 hours or up to overnight, turning occasionally. 3. Remove lamb from refrigerator about 1 hour before you plan to cook it. Spread lamb flat on an oiled barbecue grill over a solid bed of medium-hot coals or medium heat on a gas grill (you can hold your to 5 seconds). Close lid. Cook lamb, turning once and brushing with marinade, until a thermometer inserted in center of thickest part registers 140, about 40 minutes. 4. Transfer meat to a platter and cover. Let rest 1.5 to 20 minutes. Thinly slice meat, garnish with sliced red onion and radishes, and serve with yogurt-mint sauce. PER SERVING 210 CAL., 45% (95 CAL.) FROM FAT; 25 G PROTEIN; 11 G FAT (2.9 G SAT.); 2.4 G CARBO (0.5 G FIBER); 210 MG SODIUM; 73 MG CHOL. Yogurt-mint sauce In a blender, whirl cup plain whole yogurt, 1 clove minced garlic, 2/3 cup packed fresh mint leaves, 1 tsp. salt, 1 tsp. lemon juice, tsp. freshly ground black pepper, and 1/8 tsp. cayenne until smooth. Transfer to a serving bowl and stir in an additional cup plain whole yogurt. Makes a little more than 1 cup. PER TBSP. 12 CAL., 38% (4.5 0.5 G FAT (0.3 G SAT.); 1,4 G CARBO (0.5 G FIBER); 155 MG SODIUM; 1.8 MG CHOL. Israeli couscous with fresh peas and mint Also known as pearl couscous, Israeli couscous has an appealing tender-chewy texture. PREP AND COOK TIME 15 minutes MAKES 6 to 8 servings NOTES Frozen peas may be substituted for fresh, but if you use frozen, stir them in at the last minute, along with the mint. 3 cups chicken broth 2 cups Israeli couscous 1 cup fresh peas cup chopped fresh mint Salt and freshly ground black pepper 1. Bring broth and 1 cup water to a boil in a medium pan. Stir in couscous and peas. Lower heat to medium and cook, stirring frequently, until couscous and peas are tender, 5 to 10 minutes. 2. Stir in mint and cook 1 minute. Add salt and pepper to taste. PER SERVING 224 CAL, 0% (4 CAL.) FROM FAT; 9.3 G PROTEIN; 0.5 G FAT 3 G FIBER); 253 MG SODIUM; O MG CHOL. Deep-summer tomato-basil salad More an arrangement than a recipe, this salad couldn't be simpler-or taste more like summer. PREP TIME 10 minutes MAKES 6 to 8 servings 3 large vine-ripe tomatoes (red, yellow, and green) 8 to 10 basil leaves, plus a basil flower 1 cup assorted cherry tomatoes Good-quality extra-virgin olive oil Coarse salt (sea salt or kosher salt) 1. Slice large tomatoes crosswise and arrange on a platter, overlapping them and alternating colors. Tuck a basil leaf between every second or third slice. 2. Arrange cherry tomatoes in center of sliced tomatoes and top with basil flower. 3. Serve with olive oil and coarse salt on the side for sprinkling. PER SERVING 25 CAL., 0.1% (2.7 CAL.) FROM FAT; 1 G PROTEIN; 0.3 G FAT (0 G SAT.); 5.5 G CARBO (1.1 G FIBER); 12 MG SODIUM; 0 MG CHOL. Cottages to rent them rent for a minimum of one week during, summer months, but become negotiable the rest of the year. Ask about off-season rates. CHERIE L. LINDHOLM REAL ESTATE Ken and Karen Speck's 45 rental properties range from a one-bedroom near West-sound ($850 per week before Sep 17) to a four-bedroom waterfront house with a hot tub ($1,900 per week), www. orcashomes.com or 360/375-2204. ORCAS ISLAND REALTY Diamond Hill Waterfront House ($7,800 per week) overlooks Rosario Strait; Grindstone Harbor estate (about $5,000 per week) is lush. www. orcasislandrealty.com or 360/375-2145. THE PLACE AT CAYOU COVE Four cottages at a tasteful turn-of-the-century inn overlooking Deer Harbor have well-equipped kitchens and barbecue grills, from $305 per night; www.cayoucove. com or 888/596-7222. Farms to visit Go to www.navigating ourfuture.org to download a copy of the Farm Products Guide. COFFELTS FARM Sheepskins, fruit, lamb, and beef for sale on almost 200 acres just off one of the island's most scenic roads. Closed Sun; 1071 Crow Valley Rd.' Market (see below, LONE COW FARM Stock up on fresh eggs, flowers, orchard, fruits, and Linda Wales's apricot-amaretto jam. By appointment; 1369 Orcas Rd.; 360/376-3705. MAPLE ROCK FARM Specimen maples and a wood-fired outdoor bread oven make this an especially picturesque spot. 3-6 Fri or by appointment; 845 Pinneo Rd.; www. maplerockfarm.com or 360/376-6080. Other local food stops CHRISTINA'S Island regional cuisine. $$$$; 310 Main St.; 360/376-4904. EMILY'S ORCHARD STAND Dazzling array of flowers and produce from a lifelong gardener. Deer Harbor Rd. at Emily's Orchard Lane. ORCAS ISLAND FARMERS' MARKET No fewer than 44 farmers and food and crafts vendors, including Morningstar Farm (local organic vegetables and flowers). 10-3 Sat through Oct 7; Eastsound Village Green, N. Beach Rd.; www.orcasisland farmersmarket.org or 360/376-4594. ROSES BAKERY CAFE Killer garlic-parsley-walnut bread and cult Northwest wines. $$; closed Sun; 382 Prune Alley; 360/376-5805. //
In 1959 the pioneering American art historian Edgar R Richardson wrote: "Jacob Eichholtz is a problem which we must look to people in Pennsylvania to solve. His career and his works are there; and his life is part of the story of the arts in that state." Ten years later Rebecca J. Beal of Pittsburgh, a descendant of the artist, published a large catalogue raisonne of Eichholtz's known works, which includes 924 entries, 889 of which are portraits. Now another Pennsylvania-based scholar, Thomas R. Ryan, executive director of the Lancaster County Historical Society has organized an exhibition that is split between three institutions in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. In its entirety it enables visitors to understand not only the evolution of Eichholtz's career but also see his achievements in the context of the region in which he worked. The umbrella title of the exhibition is The World of Jacob Eichholtz, Portrait Painter of the Early Republic. The shows' openings are sequential. The first is Jacob Eichholtz, from Artisan to Artist, which may be seen at the Lancaster Jacob Eichholtz's Lancaster opens at the Heritage Center Museum of Lancaster County, and finally on April 25 The Artistic World of Jacob Eichholtz opens at the Phillips Museum of Art at Franklin and Marshall College. All three exhibitions remain on view until the end of December. The three-part show includes more than one hundred paintings as well as objects made during the period that Eichholtz was painting his forthright likenesses of friends, family, and other patrons. Eichholtz left us a large volume of documentation, some of which is today only available in transcripts, as the originals have been lost. The papers include his ledger covering the years 1809 to 1817, his commonplace book, and letters. Like others, Eichholtz also contributed his own biographical write-up for William Dunlap's landmark work, History of the Rise and Progress of the Arts of Design in the United States, pubfished in New York City in 1834. Lancaster, where Eichholtz was born in 1776, was fertile ground for an artist, since during his lifetime a This rural town was close to Philadelphia, where Eichholtz lived between 1823 and 1832, and where he later maintained a studio. The Lancaster Historical Society is the largest repository of the artists work, and a survey of his output will be the emphasis of the exhibition there. Lancaster had an interesting mixture of inhabitants, both native-born and immigrant, and there was a constant influx of craftsmen who brought new techniques with them from elsewhere. The exhibition at the Lancaster County Historical Society examines Eichholtz's Pennsylvania-German origins and considers his training as a coppersmith-a trade he was able to abandon as his portrait commissions increased. The exhibition at the Heritage Center Museam will consider other trades practiced in Lancaster in the early 1800s such as clockmaking and gunsmithing. When Eichholtz died there were many unfinished canvases left in his house at 46 South Lime Street, and the exhibition will have an installation that evokes the appearance of his painting room in that house. //
Inimitable American composer Duke Ellington used the line linking his 1899 birth date to his 1974 death date and wrote over 5,000 songs. Some of them became classics that could be compared to music created by European composers like Bach, Beethoven, Delius, Haydn, Mozart, Tchaikovsky and Wagner. As Duke's 96th birthday anniversary was observed around the globe with programs sponsored by the Duke Ellington International Jazz Society, the musical icon was proclaimed beyond category" by some of his music critics. Ellington once used the phrase to describe the great singer Ella Fitzgerald, says biographer Dr. John Hasse in his new book, Beyond Category: The Musical Genius Of Duke Ellington. The legendary musician's acclaim was also noted in two recent books -- The Duke Ellington Reader by Columbia University Assoc. Professor of Music Mark Tucker and Duke Ellington: Jazz Composer by music editor Ken Rattenburg. "In the early thirties composers in the classical field began recognizing Ellington's talent," Tucker's book says. One was New York University Music Department Chairman Percy Grainger, who in 1932 in the history of music, sharing honors with J.S. Bach and Frederick Delius... Ellington, in fact, is a real composer of distinction, and the first Negro composer of distinction," the book adds. During his 56-year career (1918-1974), the Washington, D.C.-born bandleader played before audiences in Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, Latin America, the Middle East, as well as the U.S. He received Grammy awards, honorary doctorates, and the highest civilian honors from the government of France. But he never received the most prestigious honor for American composers: The Pulitzer Prize. Ellington, then 60, responded with sarcasm: "Fate is being kind to me. It doesn't want me to be famous too young." However, in 1969, President Richard Nixon awarded him the nation's highest civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, at a special ceremony in the White House with the largest gathering of celebrities ever invited there to a private party. Nixon declared: "more or stands higher than the Duke." The nation later honored him with a U.S. postage stamp. In his lifetime, he is best remembered for composing and tailoring each part for a particular player. He explains: "My men and my race are the inspiration of my work. I try to catch the character and mood and feeling of my people. The music of my race is something more than the American idiom. It is the result of our transplantation to American soil and was our reaction, in plantation days, to the life we lived. What we could not say openly we expressed in music. The characteristic, melancholic music of my race has been forged from the white heat of our sorrows and from our groping. I think the music of my race is something that is going to live, something which posterity will honor..." This will include such classics as Black, Brown and Beige, My People, Harlem and New World a-Comin'. Although Duke is best known That Ain't Good, It Don't Mean A Thing If It Ain't Got That Swing, Satin Doll, Mood Indigo, Sophisticated Lady and Billy Strayhorn's Take The A Train, he was proudest of his racial statement in his play, Jump For Joy, which featured singer/actor Herb Jeffries and singer/actress Dorothy Dandridge. The anti-segregation musical drew protest hate mail from the South. It was in the '60s when, according to Tucker, "many musicians who have even gone as far as to argue that he is the only great living American composer, that Ellington became more introspective and more openly religious." One of his earlier compositions, Come Sunday, is now included in the United Methodist Hymnal for church worshippers. Calling himself "a messenger boy for God," he composed three concerts of sacred music, designed to fill cathedrals as was Handel's Messiah. The Third Sacred Concert in 1973 was performed at Westminster Abbey in London. He returned to New York and died of lung cancer Like he did in Six Degrees of Separation, Will Smith gets to spread his acting wings well beyond comedy in his latest film, the action epic Independence Day. Smith is cast as a Marine pilot out to help save planet Earth when it becomes obvious that we are NOT alone. In the film, on a typical summer day, strange things begin to happen all over the planet as an enormous spaceship suddenly begins to hover over entire cities. Soon violence, terror and panic ensues. Something out there has decided to attempt to destroy the planet during the Fourth of July weekend. The planet's only hope is a mixture of diverse people united by fate and bizarre circumstances. Smith plays Captain Steven Hiller, enlisted to help lead the effort to stave off the horrifying invaders. He described the film by saying, "Thrills, chills, spills. You'll laugh, you'll cry. You never know who's gon na die. This is a disaster film in the classic sense of the genre with a great, massive cast, and is going to be around at the end of the film. These types of films haven't been made much recently, but I grew up watching them, and it's fun to be in one." He described Hiller as "interesting because he's definitely serious, but he's also able to be funny. I've never experimented with that before. It's either been one or the other." The movie also marks the first time Smith has played a military officer. As a result, before filming began he studied the basics of flying by taking a spin in the Marines' simulator, a device that mimics the rhythm and patterns of an airborne fighter jet. Photograph Crack fighter pilot Capt. Hiller prepares himself to battle an incredible alien force that could destroy planet Earth. Photograph' Capt. Hiller is joined by the woman he loves, Jasmine, played by Vivica Fox, and her son, Dylan, played by Ross Bagley. // Playing Smith's love interest is Vivica Fox "Jasmine is a stripper, a mother, and she's going to be a wife," Ms. Fox recently told JET. "She saves the president's wife as well as her son and herself Jasmine is not a victim. She carried her own weight and had love for her son and her man. She wasn't just the girlfriend or the wife." Photograph A Jasmine tightly clutches her son Dylan as they find themselves in the aftermath of a deadly attack on the planet. // Like Smith, Ms. Fox had to do a little preparation before filming got underway. She worked out with a trainer and spent a month with a professional stripper in Los Angeles. "I worked out everyday at a strip joint. She (the stripper) taught me how to do many things. I learned some great dance moves I didn't know before." Ms. Fox, who performed on NBC's short-lived "Out All Night," also gueststarred on Smith's long-running sitcom' he Fresh esh Prince' episode five years ago. Will was crazy then, and he's crazy now," she said. "People love Will Smith. He's a really good person." Making the movie even more home-like for Smith was the casting of Ross Bagley as Jasmine's son, Dylan. Bagley was a regular cast member of "Fresh Prince." He told JET, "I didn't know Will was in the movie until I saw him in the room getting fitted. I said, 'I can't believe it.' Bagley observed that Smith was different working on a big-screen project. "On Fresh Prince' Will was real silly. On Independence Day he was more serious but still fun. I had a whole lot of fun doing the movie. We had a big dog who was really smart." A precocious seven-year-old, Ross said he immediately noticed the differences in the characters he played. "On Fresh Prince' my character was a rich kid in a didn't have much money but a lot of love. I like them both. I had love in both of them." Bagley's Independence Day experience has him now crossing his fingers that he will soon get a dog of his own. The film also featured Jeff Goldblum, Mary McDonnell, Bill Pullman, Judd Hirsch, Randy Quaid, Robert Loggia, Harry Connick Jr., James Rebhorn and Harvey Fierstein. Dean Devlin, who served as producer and writer, said "Roland (Emmerich, his co-writer) and I grew up watching the early films of Steven Spielberg, he in Germany and me in America. And we loved those big, dazzling adventures-entertainment that is best suited for the big screen, movies that just rock you and which can't be found in another medium. We're also fans of the disaster films of the 1970s, and as we were talking about the kinds of films we don't get to see anymore, we thought it would be great to revive that genre, played by Jeff Goldblum (1), map out a strategy to save the planet. Fighter pilots Hiller and Jimmy, played by Harry Connick Jr., get briefed on the deadly mission they are about to undertake. // Devlin called Smith, Goldblum and Pullman "the triumvirate... Each of these actors used their unique strengths to emphasize these three elements (brains, heart and soul). I don't think these aspects were in the script; I think they originated in the performances. Jeff Goldblum, as the genius who unravels the invaders' code, has impressive leading man qualities and is terrific at playing brilliant, quirky characters. Will Smith was clearly the heart of the picture, and he pushed that aspect way beyond anything he'd ever done before, becoming a really strong, romantic lead. And there's Bill Pullman's president, the' soul' of the picture, a man of honor who has to make tough decisions. "Fox told JET that she had to really I got stereotyped from playing the hoity-toity type on Out All Night. "And I had trouble getting seen because I didn't have a name. I had to audition six times. I worked hard. It came down to me and Lela Rochon. She had done Waiting to Exhale and had a name." But Ms. Fox's perseverance paid off, and she said the public will see a very different side of her and will be impressed with the full ensemble cast in an exciting film. "What's so great about this film is that it's not Black or White. It's universal," she said.
The Congressional Black Caucus recently completed its 27th Congressional Black Caucus Annual Legislative Conference (CBCALC) week in Washington, D.C., focusing on the issues of economic development, increased voting participation and enhanced political power set forth by Chair Maxine Waters. "In order to shape our discussions for the upcoming workshops, no matter what the topic, race is an underlying factor," said Waters, who opened the conference with a Town Hall Meeting on race relations. One of the largest gatherings in the CBC's history attended this year's conference, which sponsored 53 issue braintrusts and forums. Hundreds were on hand to applaud as South Carolina Rep. James Clyburn, the CBCALC Honorary Chairman, also cited another of the four-day conference's objectives: "We will develop the kind of leadership that can be successful for us as we approach the new millennium." Photograph Congressional Black Caucus Chair Rep. Maxine Waters addresses conference. Photograph A President Bill Clinton and Rep. James Clyburn exhort attendees of the conference to prepare for the new millennium, citing the need for leadership and brotherhood at the gala on the final evening of the conference, received a rousing ovation when he told the gathering, "As we approach the new millennium, we must decide that we can never be what we ought to be unless we get there together." Clinton added, "We don't have time for, or room for, discrimination. We've got to embrace a future in which we're all going forward together." The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation (CBCF), chaired by Sony Music Entertainment Vice President LeBaron Taylor, headlined numerous outstanding speakers, among them Dr. John Hope Franklin, who was picked by President Clinton to lead the Advisory Council on Race Relations; Dr. Cornell West, director of African-American Studies at Harvard University; and Dr. Julia Hare, noted motivational speaker and author. Some of the topics at very well attended forums and braintrusts included: Empowering the Black community, Dialogue between Civil Rights Crusaders and the Hip-Hop Generation, Trade with Africa, Women and Business, Juvenile Justice and Health: AIDS. Photograph LeBaron Taylor, Sony Music Entertainment Inc. Vice President, chairs the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation which showcased prominent Blacks discussing a myriad of topics. Rep. Major Owens (r) is among the honorees at the awards ceremony. Photograph Among the attendees of the Legislative Conference are (l-r) U.S. Labor Secretary Alexis Herman and U.S. Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater; Rep Ronald Dellums and Johnson Publishing Co. President and Chief Operating Officer Linda Johnson Rice. Photograph The late Betty Shabazz's daughters accept the Chair's award on her behalf Pictured with Vice President Al Gore are Shabazz's daughters (l-r) Attallah, Malikah, Malaak, Gamilah, Illyasah. Photograph Recipients of awards (l-r) John Hope Franklin, Coretta Scott King and Myrlie EversWilliams are congratulated by CBCF Chairman LeBaron Taylor, Sr., CBC Chair Maxine Waters and Vice President Al Gore. // Highlighting the awards ceremony, which was attended by U.S. Vice President Al Gore, was the acceptance of the Chair's Award by the Shabazz, and her sisters, on behalf of their mother, the late Dr. Betty Shabazz. Myrlie EversWilliams and Coretta Scott King were also recipients of the Chair's Award. Photograph Ms. Laura Murphy (far, l) receives the William L. Dawson Award from Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson; Danny Bakewll, Sr. receives the George W. Collins Award from Congressman William Clay (l); and NAACP Chairwoman Myrlie Evers-Williams, recipient of the Chair's award, is congratulated by Congresswoman Eva Clayton (r). Photograph Congressman Bennie Thompson (l) congratulates William Lucy, recipient of the Harold Washington Award; William Brooks, retired Vice President of Corporate Affairs for General Motors, is honored with a Chairman's Award; and Jason Charles receives the Youth Community Service Award from CBCF Chair LeBaron Taylor (r). // Other distinguished award winners included Rep. Major Owens, recipient of the Adam Clayton Powell Award for contributing to Black political awareness; Rep. Eva Clayton, recipient of the George Thomas "Mickey" Leland Humanitarian William Lucy, recipient of the Harold Washington Award for excellence in coalition building; Danny Bakewell, Sr., recipient of the George W. Collins Award for community service; and Ms. Laura W. Murphy, recipient of the William L. Dawson Award for research and leadership in legislation that addresses the needs of minorities in the U. S. Those honored for receiving the Chairman's Award were William Brooks, retired Vice President of Corporate Affairs for General Motors; Dr. John Hope Franklin; and James B. Duke, professor of history emeritus, Duke University. Jason Charles Smoot, a sophomore at Morehouse College, received the Youth Community Service Award in the amount of $10,000. Among the many other distinguished guests who attended the CBCALC events were NAACP President Kweisi Mfume, celebrated attorney Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., U.S. Labor Secretary Alexis Herman and U.S. Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater.
Wesley Snipes has done it several times in movies. So has Laurence Fishburne. Even Whitney Houston and Lela Rochon have done it. If it's still taboo, they've all committed the forbidden act of kissing Whites in films. Hollywood makes no secret that it isn't big on interracial romance on the big screen, especially when it comes to Black men kissing White women. Yet that hasn't deterred Black actors from braving these roles anyway. Wesley Snipes doesn't believe that it's taboo for Blacks and Whites to kiss in movies. In Spike Lee's controversial 1991 movie Jungle Fever, Snipes cheats on his Black wife with a White co-worker in the dramatic film. Six years later Snipes stepped on the edge once more when he was the leading man in the film One Night Stand. In this particular movie, Snipes goes all out. Not only does he cheat with a White woman (Nastassja Kinski), but also his character is married to an Asian woman (MingNa Wen). The heck with interracial movie taboos. Snipes said in the movie, which won him the best actor award at the Venice Film Festival. Photograph A Wesley Snipes didn't mind kissing Annabella Sciorra in Jungle Fever. Photograph Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner shared a tender kiss in the box-office hit The Bodyguard. The film marked Houston's remarkable big-screen debut. // "Early on there were concerns about the Black community reminiscing to Jungle Fever and missing the point of the story," Snipes told EBONY. "So we didn't want to go that route. And I've done a lot of movies where I've had White women as my co-stars. That would have been kind of redundant. So I said, Well, let me go either Spanish or Asian. That's something unusual." Laurence Fishburne is another actor who doesn't shy away from a role where he'll have a White lover. He's appeared in the 1995 movie Bad Company, where he engaged in smoldering love scenes with Ellen Barkin, and later that same year he the movie of the same name. White actress Irene Jacob was his character's new bride, Desdomona. Photograph A Laurence Fishburne and Irene Jacob were lovers in the movie Othello. Photograph Denzel Washington was adamant about not kissing in the 1995 movie Virtuosity. His co-star in the film, Kelly Lynch, said she begged him to have their characters kiss. Photograph A Lela Rochon and Timothy Hutton married in Showtime's Mr. and Mrs. Loving. // Whitney Houston's silver screen debut in The Bodyguard blew interracial taboos right out of the water. The hugely successful film transcended race, teaming her up with Kevin Costner in the 1992 box-office smash. Lela Rochon's kisses and loving were so good in 1989's Harlem Nights as the worldly character Sunshine that it made her White lover call his wife on the phone and tell her that he was never returning home! In 1996 Rochon starred opposite Timothy Hutton in the Showtime movie, Mr. and Mrs. Loving. The touching film was based on a true story of how and how their efforts paid off when they changed interracial marriage laws in Virginia and 15 other states. Photograph Morgan Freeman and Ashley Judd didn't kiss in the movie version Kiss The Girls. Photograph Laurence Fishburne and Ellen Barkin were hot-to-trot in 1995's Bad Company. Photograph A Nastassja Kinski and Snipes had an affair in last year's movie One Night Stand. // Denzel Washington is very selective when choosing roles with interracial story lines. He takes into account who his audience might be. "They cut a kissing scene between me and Mimi Rogers out of The Mighty Quinn because of audience reaction at test screenings," Washington told the Chicago SunTimes. "Black women hated the scene. White men hated the scene." So, when he appeared with Kelly Lynch in the 1995 futuristic thriller Virtuosity, Washington remembered his audience. Lynch told the Chicago Sun-Times that she begged Washington to have their characters kiss. "He felt very strongly about it," Lynch told the newspaper. "I felt there strongly that the White males, who were the target audience of this movie, would not want to see him kiss a White woman." Photograph A Halle Berry and Christopher McDonald were married in The Rich Man's Wife. Photograph Courtney B. Vance and Kerry Fox were head over heels in love in The Affair. Photograph Dennis Haysbert and Michelle Pfeiffer were intimate in Love Field. // Washington's observance of his audience possibly could have led to changing the plot for the movie The Pelican Brief, which co-starred Julia Roberts. When John Grisham's bestselling novel was made into a movie in 1993, the movie's main characters, Washington and Roberts, did not have the romance written in the novel. In Spike Lee's upcoming drama, He Got Game, Washington does, however, cross the line when his convict character kisses a White prostitute. Washington told the Chicago Sun-Times of Black women's reaction to the scene, "I hear Black women stood up and yelled, Denzel, you promised! you that when the audience sees a love scene on film, they put themselves up there. It's like Tom Cruise or Denzel is kissing you. So in a certain way, I belong to these women, and they had a spontaneous reaction to the kiss." The interracial storyline in the movie version of the best-seller Kiss The Girls, by James Patterson, was also changed. In the book Dr. Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman) and Alex McTiernan (Ashley Judd) had a romantic relationship. When the novel was made into a movie last year, the romance was axed. Lisa Bonet, who played in the old "The Cosby Show" series, wasn't afraid to kiss Mickey Rourke in the seductive movie Angel Heart in 1987. The film caused quite a stir due to its heated love scenes between the two. Others who've kissed Whites on screen have included Halle Berry with Eric Thal in The Wedding, 1998 and with Christopher McDonald in The Rich Man's Wife, 1996, 1997; Dennis Haysbert with Michelle Pfeiffer in Love Field, 1991; and Gregory Hines with Isabella Rossellini in White Nights, 1985. Photograph In 1985's White Nights Isabella Rossellini and Gregory Hines were an item Photograph Lisa Bonet really turned heads with Mickey Rourke in 1987's Angel Heart. //
Celia Yette, born without arms, has overcome her physical challenges to live a normal life. // "Physically challenged" is the terminology that 29-year-old Celia Yette prefers to be called. But if you ever meet this 3-foot-0 woman who brims with confidence, self -- pride and beauty, you'd immediately realize that whatever challenges she is faced with, she can overcome. Yette, who resides in Petersburg, VA, was born with no arms. Her mother, Lorraine Jackson, took thalidomide, a medication prescribed for pregnant women in the late 1960s and early 1970s to alleviate morning sickness while she carried Yette. Doctors hadn't discovered yet that thalidomide caused a lot of babies to be born without limbs. Many many times Yette has asked God why such a traumatic thing happened to her. "Not that I would ever wish this on any of my other siblings, but I do wonder out of all of us, why I was the one chosen to have the physical difference," said Yette, who has two brothers, Gregory Yette,, Cynthia Yette, 28. Through it all, Yette has survived and learned to live her life as normal as possible. Activities that people use arms and hands to do, Yette does with her size 9 feet and her toes. Eating, washing dishes, putting on make up, combing her hair, house cleaning, getting dressed, reading, writing, and cooking are all done with her feet, toes and the small parts of her upper arms, referred to by doctors as stumps. When Yette was 4 years old she had prosthetic arms, but they were too heavy and uncomfortable for her. She cried all the time while she tried to maneuver the heavy, hook-like arms. Eventually the doctors removed them. Since then she has relied on her feet and toes to be arms and fingers. "I have been using my feet for as long as I can remember," said Yette. "I don't remember not using them. My mom told me I thought I was, so I just started using my feet just kind of naturally like you would with your hands." Photograph A Yette, who loves to read in her spare time, Photograph uses her toes to turn the pages of a book. Photograph Yette applies lipstick as she prepares to run an errand. She hopes to drive a car soon. // Whatever tasks Yette sets out to perform, whether small or large, require her to exercise an enormous amount of patience. What takes a person with arms and hands a minute to do takes Yette five to complete. "I feel like I have to be patient about a lot of things," said Yette. For instance, doing dishes, anyone else can just walk up to the sink and get started. But I have to climb in the chair, sit next to the sink and then get started, and that takes extra minutes. Or, if I wanted to grab something from the cabinet, somebody else can just grab it in Growing up, Yette led a very happy childhood, and she credits this to her loving family. She says her family has been her rock, and they are the reason she has such a healthy and positive outlook on her life. "You would really have to meet my family to understand the person that I am," said Yette. "My family has always accepted me and made me feel like them. I'm Cel to them, and they've always treated me just like anyone else." As a result of her strong family roots, Yette also has a lot of self -- determination and ambition. "I'm a lot like my father, Emmitt Yette. He's very determined. And I'm a lot like my mom too. They are both strong, but in different ways. My step father, Delmas Jackson, has contributed a lot to my life as well." Once Yette left home to go to college at Virginia State University, where she earned of arts, both in English, she realized that the real world wasn't as nurturing and kind as her family. "When you leave home and you run into people who don't see you the same way or feel the same way, that really hurts," said Yette. "And that was my experience in the beginning. That hurt a whole lot because I realized everybody didn't look at me the way my family did." Photograph Yette stirs a pot of soup on the kitchen stove. Photograph Yette washes dishes on the side of her sink. Tasks that take a few minutes for people with arms may take Yette twice as long. Photograph A Yette uses her toes to write and (r) she uses her toes to type on her computer. At right, Yette relaxes her nerves by crocheting. // However, in spite of a life filled with mean looks and daunting stares, Yette completed her college degrees and is looking forward to pursuing a career in television writing car. Yette must have a specially designed car in order to take her driving test. The type of car Yette needs to drive costs approximately $35,000, but she does not have a way to and from a job so she can't earn money to save for her dream vehicle. "It's very frustrating," said Yette about not being able to drive. "Here I am, 29 years old, and I hate depending on someone else to go to the grocery store, or even if I want to go out. If things were different I could just hop in my car and drive." For now, she happily counts her blessings and is very grateful to God for all of the wonderful and kind people, family, and friends He has filled her life with. She has come a long way from the 6-year-old girl who sat on the steps of her home in Knoxville, TN, looked in the mirror at herself and for the first time realized she was different. And she tells people exactly what her mother told her, what she believes deep in her heart and uses as a driving force: "This is my life. I can either sit back and feel sorry for myself, or go out and achieve whatever I want to do for myself." Contributions to Yette's vehicle fund (Please make all checks payable to Celia Yette) can be mailed to: Celia Yette, C/O Eunice Griffin, The Department of Rehabilitative Services, 2795 South Crater Rd., Petersburg, VA 23805. Photograph Yette is able to dial the telephone by using her toes. A Yette waits for an elevator in her apartment building; she uses the upper parts of her arms, referred to by doctors as stumps, to call the elevator. Photograph Celia Yette poses with her family (l-r) sister Cynthia Yette; brother, Gregory Yette; and mother, Lorraine Yette, when she received her bachelor's degree in English from Virginia State University in 1994. //
SPORTS Entertainment stars are living out a double fantasy by playing in a little-known league that is gaining recognition with each season-the NBA Entertainment League (NBAEL). R &B; singer Brian McKnight, rappers Ice Cube and Coolio, actors Morris Chestnut, Boris Kodjoe, Bill Bellamy, Don Cheadle, Wayne Brady, Larenz Tate, Orlando Jones, Guy and Joe Torry and Cylk Cozart are some of the Black players who fill the 12-team rosters and compete every Sunday at an undisclosed location in Los Angeles during the two 11-week seasons to show they have major hoop skills on -- court and off-camera. The NBAEL is the NBA's invitation-only, closed-to-the-public basketball league for celebrities and entertainment-industry executives. It was formed four years ago in an attempt to build and nurture industry relationships. "We recognized that the entertainment industry has a passion for watching NBA basketball, but their passion for playing basketball equals their love of attending NBA games," said Zane Stoddard, senior manager of entertainment marketing for the NBA and also the celebrity league's unofficial commissioner. These part-time athletes take the McKnight, a Blazers player, sang the national anthem at the NFL's NFC Championship game in East Rutherford, NJ, then took a plane back to L.A. in time for the league's championship game that night, which he won. Photograph R &B; singer Brian McKnight takes time from the studio to compete in the NBA Entertainment League. McKnight was named league MVP two years ago. // In effort to create an NBA-authentic environment, the league provides everything from the official logos, regulation team uniforms, socks and shoes, professional referees and sometimes, even assistant NBA coaches will step up to help the teams develop offensive plays. Beyond this, the championship teams also receive replica NBA championship rings. Dalvin Degrate, a Jodeci band member, says with his talented hoop skills, he feels he's the Allen Iverson on his team. "Ironically, I play for the 76ers and my number is 3." Degrate, who grew up playing ball in the New York parks, reiterates the seriousness of players in this league. The competition level isn't like a bunch of people that sing, act and produce and trying to play ball on Sunday. I thought at first I was going to come in and it was going to be a breeze, scoring like 40 points a game, but it's not like that. HBO series Soul Food actor Boris Kodjoe, who played basketball in high school said, "I'm pretty competitive when I get on the court; I try to win definitely. I get pretty excited, but rm not out there to hurt anybody. I try to stay healthy as well." Nuggets player and movie actor Cylk Cozart is currently working on a new Marvin Gaye film in which he's playing Marvin Gaye. As a former high school and college basketball player, Cozart says playing in the league is "almost like a fantasy. You get to put on the NBA uniforms and be a legend in your own mind..." Photograph Actors Morris Chestnut (is a "nice change of pace" from working daily on the set. Photograph Singer Dalvin Degrate is among the talented celebrities whose basketball skills are displayed in the NBA Entertainment League. Zane Stoddard (l), the NBAEL's unofficial commissioner, and Grammy-winning recording artist Coolio were among those who traveled to Korea with the league to entertain the U.S. armed forces troops. // The NBAEL travels as well. The league feels this is novel because the guys get to experience somewhat of a NBA road trip as if they were a NBA player. On August 27, celebrities from the league will play a charity basketball game at the Thomas and Mack Center at University of Nevada Las Vegas in conjunction with the MAGIC International Trade Show. More so, they travel overseas too. In May, some league teams toured Korea for a week and played for various U.S. military camps to entertain the U.S. armed forces troops, supporting the USO and its 60-year traditional commitment to building the morale of military troops overseas. Jerry the event in Korea and says that the NBAEL was the A-list entertainment that everyone appreciated. "The league has gotten extremely difficult to get into," Zane Stoddard explains. "You have hundreds of thousands of people in the entertainment industry and only 130 spots in the league. Everybody is a basketball player when they come." The NBAEL has two seasons plus a three-round playoff each year (May -- July and October-January) because they want to make the game times conducive to the various entertainment work schedules. Despite the hectic production and recording schedules these stars have, their performance on court and commitment to the game is stellar as well.
A President George W. Bush escorts Coretta Scott King, widow of slain civil rights leader the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., to a King Day ceremony at the White House. Photograph * The Rev. Bernice A. King, assistant pastor of Greater Rising Star Baptist Church in Atlanta, and Martin Luther King III, executive director of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in Atlanta, present Bush with a portrait of their father in the White House's East Room, where King watched President Lyndon B. Johnson sign the Civil Rights Act of 1964. // NATIONAL REPORT Calling the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. "a man who brought much good into the world by the power of his voice and the truth of his words," President George W Bush celebrated his first King national holiday in the White House by praising the slain civil rights leader and accepting a gift from the King family. In the East Room of the White House, the same room King watched President Lyndon B. Johnson sign the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Coretta Scott who would have been 73. She asked Americans to use the holiday as a day of service, not simply a day off. As Bush stood arm-in-arm with Mrs. King, he thanked her for the portrait and said of her husband: "It is with a great sense of pride and gratitude that we celebrate this 17th national holiday in honor of Dr. King's life and work. Let us take this opportunity to recall his vision and renew his call for equal justice for all. We enter this new year and this annual celebration with a revived national spirit." During the brief White House ceremony, student debaters from Texas Southern University performed a dramatic interpretation of King's 1963 "I have a dream" speech. Earlier, Bush had announced the creation of a Martin Luther King scholarship program for talented college students, and also announced that federal funding for Black and Hispanic colleges would increase $12 million to more than $350 million. Photograph * First lady Laura Bush speaks to Mrs. King during a King King had been pastor. Photograph * The Rev. Bernice A. King, assistant pastor of Greater Rising Star Baptist Church in Atlanta, and Martin Luther King III, executive director of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in Atlanta, present Bush with a portrait of their father in the White House's East Room, where King watched President Lyndon B. Johnson sign the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Photograph A Timothy Mays waves the flag at a King Day rally at the Alabama Capitol in Montgomery. Photograph * In the spirit of the day's theme, A Day On, Not A Day Off, Tony Dungy (r), new head coach of the Indianapolis Colts, Dennis Green (c), former head coach of the Minnesota Vikings, and Herm Edwards, head coach of the New York Jets, perform community service in Washington, D.C. // Meanwhile, Laura Bush honored King by traveling to Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where King was pastor. About 2,000 people packed the church, where peace and a man committed to change." All across the country, from Los Angeles to New York City, from Montgomery, AL, to Hermiston, OR, Americans participated in activities honoring Dr. King. While Martin Luther King III spoke to a group in Detroit, Kings' eldest daughter, Yolanda, told 1,500 people gathered at a memorial breakfast in Boston that September 11 had erased racial differences-for the time being. "Skin color was covered by the ash of burning towers," she said. Perhaps the best response to this tragedy is to not go back to normal. In Memphis, the National Civil Rights museum honored the holiday with a variety of King exhibits and a locally produced play. While in Baltimore, residents celebrated with an "I Have a Dream" weekend. In Washington, D.C., a prayer service was followed by a march to the African-American Civil War Memorial, the site for a wreath-laying ceremony. And in Los Angeles, thousands attended the annual King Kingdom Day part in the 17th annual event that ran between Crenshaw and MIK boulevards. New York City held its annual King Walk. Participants sang freedom songs and toured important civil rights sites in Harlem. The city's new mayor, Michael Bloomberg, spent part of the day with the Rev. Al Sharpton, speaking at Sharpton's National Action Network in Harlem. And in Chicago some 2,000 gathered downtown for the 12th Annual Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Commemorative Breakfast sponsored by Rainbow/PUSH Coalition and PUSH-Excel. The keynote speaker was U.S. Rep. Jesse L. Jackson, Jr., who was joined by a host of area politicians, business and religious leaders in celebrating the late Nobel Peace Prize winners life and legacy. A week earlier, Mayor Richard M. Daley hosted the city's 16th annual King Interfaith Breakfast. New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial served as keynote speaker. Photograph * Queen of Soul Aretha Franklin honors King through song at the SCLC's King Day celebration in Detroit. Photograph * Patricia Bell, with portrait of King in hand Fort Worth, TX. King would have been 73 this year. Photograph * The Rev. Jesse Jackson and son, Jonathan Jackson, president of the board, PUSH-Excel, chat with Senator Richard J. Durbin at the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition and PUSH-Excel's annual King Commemorative Breakfast at the Chicago Hilton &; Towers Hotel in Chicago. Photograph * New Orleans Mayor Marc H. Morial (standing), the keynote speaker at the city of Chicago's annual King Interfaith Breakfast, greets Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley during the festivities at the Chicago Hilton di Towers Hotel. // King's birthday became a national holiday in 1986, three years after President Ronald Reagan signed a bill that established the third Monday of every January as the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Holiday. Today, the King holiday is celebrated in the United States and in more than 100 other nations around the world.
The abundant wildlife and rich natural history of this exotic archipelago have lured scientists and adventurers for centuries. Photograph Above: Left: Far left: // Looking back on his sojourn in the Galapagos Islands in the mid-19th century, Charles Darwin dubbed this exotic archipelago a "living laboratory of evolution." A Pacific Ocean province of Ecuador, this group of 13 islands and eight half-square-mile islets straddles the equator 600 miles west of the mainland. Every primordial vista of this sparsely populated archipelago pulses with evidence of the volcanic activity and tectonic crashing that, some four and a half million years ago, thrust these rocky outcroppings 7,000 to 10,000 feet up from the sea floor to heights greater than a mile above sea level. Claimed for Spain by Tomas de Berlanga, Bishop of Panama, in 1535, the island group was known alternately as Las Encantadas ( "the Bewitched Isles") and Insulae de los Galapagos (Old Spanish for "the Islands of the Tortoises") in the 1570s, when they first appeared on maps. Because they lie in the Humboldt, and in the path of the southeastern trade winds, the general climate of the archipelago is marked by low rainfall, low humidity, and low air and water temperatures. Despite their equatorial situation, the islands' temperatures remain relatively consistent and pleasant throughout the year. I traveled to the Galapagos in late spring and during the course of my 10-day expedition set foot on more than 20 islands. My companions and I traveled by ship, the only means of group transport that allows meaningful exploration of these geological outposts. Our vessel was the sleek black-hulled Alta, a trimasted, 140-foot luxury schooner that was elegantly outfitted from stem to stem. While leafing through a book in the Alta's library, I came across an observation that Darwin had noted during his five-week exploration of this intriguing chain in 1835: By far, the most remarkable feature in the natural history of this archipelago is that the different islands to a considerable extent are inhabited by a different set of beings. We never dreamed that islands, them in sight of each other formed of precisely the same rocks, placed under a quite similar climate, rising to a nearly equal height, would have been differently tenanted .... // Area of Detail // It was the "different set of beings" he studied on the Galapagos that encouraged Darwin's pursuit of his theories of evolution and natural selection. These unusual inhabitants continue to make the Galapagos Islands fascinating-as we discovered on our first foray to South Plaza Island. Meeting the "Locals" Donning bright-orange life jackets, we piled into the Alta's two pangas, the motorized rubber dinghies that ferry visitors back and forth from the ship to the islands. Scores of sea lions basking on the beach barked raucously as we disembarked at a makeshift dock and inched past them. Black mottled land iguanas, mouths drawn back into tight reptilian grimaces, reposed in the shade of spiky opuntia cactus. Vivid-red Sally Lightfoot crabs sidled over the slick black rocks that separate the marine from the terrestrial environment. I stepped gingerly over twitching mound of eight-inch-long land iguanas. Though I was near enough to feel the spray these miniature dinosaurs exhale as they expel the salt that builds up in their system, they took no notice of me. Continuing along the trail, I inched past a group of sea lions so near they could have tickled me with their whiskers. A mockingbird alighted on another hiker's fanny pack and proceeded to snoop for a snack. Because the animal species here existed for millennia without encountering humankind, they never evolved a fear of us, which makes getting close to them easy-perhaps overly so, for their sakes. From steep cliffs overlooking the vast stretch of the Pacific and other islands in the archipelago, we spied blue-footed boobies-seabirds that ride thermals until they locate fish near the water's surface, at which point they plunge-dive in a flash to feed. Swallow-tailed gulls soared from nest to sea to sky and back again. Below, white-tipped sharks and schools of long, yellow mullet gleamed faintly just below the water's pulled on the long tail feathers of fleeing red-billed tropicbirds, forcing them to disgorge their well-earned suppers while the interlopers swooped down to gobble up-in midairthe abandoned victuals. Finches grazed on the mites and ticks that infest the iguanas' rippled, leathery skin. And every now and then a sea lion slid off the rocks into the water in pursuit of a marine morsel. The Tortoises' Plight Sailing through the night, we arrived at Santa Cruz Island, home to the Charles Darwin Research Station and its tortoiseconservation pens. Efforts to snatch the tortoise from the maw of extinction illustrate the difficulty of conserving the archipelago's natural resources in their pristine state. Three races of these lumbering reptiles, which can weigh up to 500 pounds and live for 200 years, were eradicated by early sailors; several other tortoise populations have also been devastated by nonnative animals that early settlers introduced to the islands over the centuries. Fortunately, a breeding program managed by the station is keeping the captive Geochelone elephantopus, the giant Galapagos tortoise baby tortoises to prepare them for their eventual return to the wild. Scientists are optimistic about the fate of most of the archipelago's tortoises, save Lonesome George, the station's most famous full-sized inhabitant and the last remaining member of his particular subspecies. With no potential mate in sight, George seems destined to suffer the fate of his predecessors. Continuing our clockwise navigation, we headed to Espanola (Hood) Island, the southernmost island in the Galapagos chain. Led by Reyna Oleas, an Ecuadorian naturalist and guide, we set off on a chalky trail that twisted up cliffs to the breeding grounds of masked boobies and swallow-tailed gulls. Treading carefully to avoid both the shallow ground scrapings that pass for nests and the soft, downy chicks peeping out from under their mothers' feathers, we soon arrived at an open, rocky area that serves as a "runway" for droves of waved albatrosses. Espanola Island is the world's only nesting ground for these ivory-hued, turkey-sized birds. In fact, some 10,000 breeding pairs flock to the island. After leaving their nests, fledgling albatrosses will remain at sea for five years or more, which makes for some frustrating and seemingly antic landing attempts when they finally return to the runway. Kayaking and Snorkeling Though much of a Galapagos expedition revolves around hiking, sea kayaking and snorkeling reveal abundant island riches as well. In fact, quiet kayaks are far superior to a noisy panga for slipping up on the rotund sea turtles that inhabit many of the islands' lagoons. Among the archipelago's many snorkeling spots, Santa Maria Island's Devil's Crown ranks high. This crescent-shaped, underwater volcanic cone is a marine playground for schools of iridescent fishes, occasional sharks, immense urchins, and elaborately colored Moorish idolsskinny reef fish taller than they are long that have a pronounced dorsal fm. Several of us played chase with the impish sea lions attracted to our air bubbles. No one, however, can match the sea's true aquanauts. Another part of our expedition crest of Sierra Negra (Black Mountain), whose caldera-at four to six miles across-is the largest in the island group. (Calderas are craters formed when volcanoes collapse; the calderas in the Galapagos are not only huge but sometimes form mountaintop lakes.) But expansive views from the caldera's rim weren't our ultimate pursuit. Picking our way on foot across a rugged lava field, we came to Sierra Negra's extraordinary fumaroles, deep geological escape valves that release sulfur-laden steam into the open air to ward off the eruption of what islanders refer to as "devil fire." Yet another excursion took us to Genovesa (Tower) Island, mating and nesting grounds of the magnificent frigatebird. Courtship among these tropical seabirds is a rather elaborate ritual during which the male frigates, bright-red gular sacks dangling beneath their bill, indulge in the primping. During mating season, the male seeks out a suitable spot for a nest and upon finding one, lands, struts around, then puffs up his red sack spreads his wings, flutters wildly, and calls up to the females flying overhead. With dozens of flashy displays to assess, a female will eventually find a particular nesting location-and the size and color of the nesting male's sackpreferable to others. After she has made her choice and descended, the male drapes a wing around her and they mate. By comparison, masked, or white, boobies court without much pomp. After the male and female land, they offer each other bits of twigs and brush for the nest they'll eventually build. In rapid-fire motion, they clack their beaks together, preen and ruffle one another's feathers, and rub their long red beaks up and down each other's necks, all to the music they themselves provide, the female honking in response to the male's whistle. An Evolved Viewpoint On the eve of our departure from the Galapagos Islands, I decided to sneak in a pre-supper swim. Diving off the Alta's stem, I stroked 100 yards out waters. Several avian laggards were winging their way back to their island roosts, serenaded by the distant bellowing of a bull sea lion calling his harem to shore. As a twilight breeze brushed against our fine galleon's sails, the first star twinkled to life in the darkening sky. Having come to the "Enchanted Islands" in part to put some of Darwin's theories to the test of my own observation, I was taking home an unexpectedly evolved appreciation for the natural world and the purposeful, often amusing, behavior of its wildlife. IA Author Affiliation Freelance writer Diane MacEachern is based in Washington, D.C. //
Masterpieces of woodworkingbuilt piece by piece by piece by piece. BY RICHARD MUHLBERGER // MARQUETRY IS A CENTURIES-OLD TECHNIQUE OF ornamenting wood surfaces with an overlay of wood veneers that have been carefully cut and then glued onto the surface of the wood to form a decorative pattern. Transcending the ages and spanning many civilizations, the craft has been used to enhance, dramatize, and stylize artifactsbeds, boxes, chairs, clocks, secretaries, tables, even violin cases. Marquetry has never been a useful craft, called on to fulfill a utilitarian need. Instead, its role has always been to embellish, beautify, and satisfy the human desire to transform the ordinary. Although documentation of marquetry techniques dates back to ancient Egypt, Europe has known a continuous history of marquetry making only since the I7th century. Marquetry in America descends from this tradition, through the immigration of European marquetry makers in the 19th century. By this time, marquetry stood in opposition to the mechanical processes of the industrialized era: The labor-intensive process relied on painstaking handcraftsmanship and only the simplest tools-a Right:1 What Marquetry Is-and Isn't // This autumn, an exhibition featuring 70 pieces of marquetry selected from the remarkable collection of Marjorie and Robert L. Hirschhorn will be presented in "Masterpieces in Wood: American Folk Marquetry from the Hirschhorn Foundation," a groundbreaking exhibition at the Museum of American Folk Art, in New York City. The show is dedicated to bringing to light and focus the many Americans who have practiced the art of marquetry, sometimes achieving local celebrity for their efforts, more often working in obscurity. IN COLONIAL AMERICA, TALENTED WOODWORKERS were almost as abundant as wood itself, and an unbroken tradition of carpentry was established. Early American woodworkers possessed the skills to make marquetry, but this type of ornamentation was not widely used until the Federal period, when it most often took the form of stringing or banding that adorned the edges of a piece of furniture. The popular taste for marquetry did not gain a strong foothold until after the close of the Civil War, and extended for go years period of mass immigration from Germany, many of whom were woodworkers trained in ornamental veneers. Photograph For left: // To produce marquetry, woodworkers must depend upon an assortment of veneers (thin layers of wood), a versatile saw, good glue, and planes. The earliest extant European marquetry, dating from the late Middle Ages in Italy, was assembled from wood chips gouged from planks with chisels and carved to size with knives. The fretsaw, invented in 1562, brought precision to the cutting and shaping of veneers. This lightweight saw, with its U-shaped metal frame and narrow-toothed blade of clockspring steel, is still in use and is also called a coping saw. In 1799, the foot-powered jigsaw was patented in Auxerre, France. Like the fretsaw, it had a blade that was strong enough to cut veneers and flexible enough to saw intricate shapes. A major difference from the fretsaw, whose blade is stretched like the string of a bow, is that the blade on the jigsaw is in a sewing machine. Steam-powered sawmills, which were common in America by I830, made it possible to cut 15 to zo veneers to the inch of timber. Despite the mass production of veneers, however, many makers continued to apply hand methods to their work, particularly in the sawing of veneers. Detailed inventories associated with particular marquetry projects indicate that American marquetry makers used local woods, such as cherry and maple, as well as imported mahogany and many kinds of exotic woods. Even more colors could be achieved by staining. The range of designs that could be created through the use of cut and shaped wood veneers was seemingly limitless, from uniform geometric borders to elaborate scenes that sometimes created the illusion of paintings. THE HOURS OF LABOR NECESSARY TO ornament an object with marquetry made the pieces far more costly than most Americans could afford. As a result, the gift of a piece of marquetry was considered priceless, expressing the maker's substantial investment of time and emotion. Large, ornate works country fairs-even international exhibitions. While there was sometimes an opportunity for a craftsman to win prize money, documents demonstrate that a marquetry maker was mainly interested in showing how many hours he labored in making his masterwork, how many pieces of veneer were used, and, often, how many species of trees had sacrificed their wood. Industry and complexity were highly valued during the 19th century, and few man-made objects incorporated more of both qualities than marquetry. Richard Muhlberger is the former director of the Museum of Fine Arts, Spring field, Mass. Sidebar Remarkable Marquetry Sidebar MUCH MARQUETRY HAS BEEN LOST TO SHRINKING, WARPING, AND ROT, MAKing the Museum of American Folk Art's current exhibition-on view from October 3,1998, through January 10,1999-all the more astounding as a display of connoisseurship and preservation. Guest curator Richard Muhlberger's 240-page companion volume, Masterpieces in Wood: American Folk Marquetry from The Hirschhorn Foundation ($65), is available through the museum. For details about the book or exhibition, visit or call, Columbus Avenue between 65th and 66th Streets, New York, NY 10023; (212) 595-9533. //
A still-life painter preserves the bounty of the garden in her work. BY MARIE P ROE LL ER // PAINTER MIMI ROBERTS LEARNED TO appreciate good food at an early age. As young girl growing up in England, Mimi haunted her mother's kitchen, a culinary paradise of simmering pots, intoxicating aromaseven pheasants in the fridge. But it wasn't until Mimi went off to college that she ever considered combining her fascination with fine food with her passion for fine art. As an art student, Mimi was made aware of the work of European still-life painters from the 16th and 17th centuries. She was especially intrigued by artists who created dramatic renderings of the trappings of privilege and social position for their status-conscious clients. Exotic foods-oysters, artichokes, pomegranates, and almonds-figured prominently in the works of artists from the Netherlands to Spain. Their paintings, rich in color and wonderfully detailed, captured the young artist's imagination. Today Mimi follows the tradition of the classic still-life artists, with one caveat: She prefers more common subject matter. "Sometimes more humble can result in the most beautiful paintings," she explains. Artist at Work Mimi's themesa particular vegetable or fruit or the ingredients of a favorite recipeseldom vary, but her models are seasonal. "It depends on what's in the garden or the market at the time," she reveals. "If it's brussels sprout season, I'll paint brussels sprouts." Fortunately, the garden's calendar provides an ever-changing lineup of produce from which Mimi may choose her subjects. "I've just done a great run of cabbages," she told us when we spoke with her this past spring, at the tail end of England's cabbage season. "Asparagus season is coming up; I'm looking forward to the change." Once she's chosen her object, Mimi cuts a wood panel to the appropriate size. "If it's a single cucumber, I will cut the wood into a small, horizontal rectangle," Mimi explains. "For a full set of ingredients proceeds to capture her subject in oil, taking special care to depict the smallest detail in the fold of a cabbage leaf or the glint of sunlight on a lemon rind." "I enjoy vegetables as objects-their colors, shapes, and textures," she says. Photograph "My subject matter is seasonal," says still-life artist Mimi Roberts (shown here in her kitchen). If cabbages or brussels sprouts are in season, she explains, that's the time of year she'll create works like A Cabbage on a Plate (top right) and A Basket of Sprouts (bottom right). Clients often commission Mimi to immortalize the ingredients of their favorite recipes; the fresh garlic, eggs, olive oil, and lemon needed for aioli appear in the picture above. Photograph Above: A religieuse-a concoction of pastry, chocolate icing, and whipped cream-sits before its likeness in oil. // A traditional black and gold frame provides the finishing touch for many of Mimi's creations. "It's fun formal, tongue-in-cheek manner," she confides. Personal Preferences A good number of Mimi's commissions come from fellow food lovers. "If a woman's husband is particularly keen on peas, for instance, I might be asked to do a special work for a birthday or anniversary," Mimi says. "Or perhaps you've grown a marvelous specimen in your garden and you want to do more than just take a photograph of it. You might want a portrait of it." One couple loved Indian curries so much that they asked Mimi to depict all the ingredients required for their favorite dish. Another work she recently completed-a wholesome selection of fruits, vegetables, fish, and grains-hangs in the offices of a cancer-research group. Inspiration All Around Amateurs eager to attempt a still life of their own can take a cue from Mimi. Her advice is simple: "Look around you. Artists have long found inspiration in everyday things." "Ingredients" for a great painting lie in the pantry, perhaps?), the grocery store, and the roadside farm stands you'll pass this summer. When you find your muse, pick up your paintbrush and dig in. a Painter Mimi Roberts accepts commissions when time allows. For information, you can call her directly at oii-16o8-674364. An Artist's Library A GOOD BOOK CAN HELP FAMILIAR ZE you with the specific considerations of still-life painting. Two we like: Barron's Art Handbooks: Still Life (1996; $9.95) and Painting Sumptuous Vegetables, Fruits &; Flowers in Oil, by Joe Anna Arnett (North Light Books; 1998; $27.99). To glean inspiration from the masters, a new book, Still Life: A History, by Sybille Ebert-Schifferer (Abrams; $125), features the works of five centuries of still-life painters, from Caravaggio to Warhol. -M.RP
Siting is important for every garden, but especially so for those that seek to highlight a single color. Clearly defined, concentrated plant groupings draw visitors for closer inspection and allow the interplay between differing flower and foliage palettes and leaf and blossom textures their fullest effect. Here, artemisia (left foreground and rear center) and lamb's ears (right, foreground, center, and rear) create islands of silvery gray that let the waves of grass recede into the background while they raise the fleecy white rose petals (back, left and right) to seeming cloud status. // Provided that one does not run the idea to death, and provided one has enough room, it is interesting to make a one-colour garden .... Rarely have so few words launched such a widespread trend in garden to design as did this declaration from Vita Sackville-West, the esteemed novelist, poet, and gardener who, with her husband, Sir Harold Nicolson, designed, planted, and wrote about the now-famed gardens at Sissinghurst, in Kent, England. Between 1930 and 1960 the deteriorated Tudor castle into a garden masterpiece that today attracts more than a million visitors a year. One of Sissinghurst's centerpieces is the acclaimed White Garden. Much imitated, never repeated, it has spawned.a host of largely unsuccessful imitations across three continents. It is easy to understand the appeal of such a landscape: During the day, even in the hottest weather, a garden of white produces a cool, calming effect; the real show, however, occurs at twilight, when the white blossoms luminesce in the near dark. Combine a bit of moonlight, a few fluttering moths and fireflies, and the heady fragrance of evening bloomers like moonflower and honeysuckle, and the experience can be sublime. Photograph Create an oasis of order, elegance, and calm. // Sounds alluring, doesn't it? And simple, too? It is, after all, just white. The truth is, creating such a garden is deceptively complex because its success depends so heavily on pairing just the right mix. The first and most essential consideration for a white garden is siting. While it has been suggested that one can simply create a "white section" of landscape within an existing border, a meager clump of white plants could never achieve the ethereal results defined by the Sissinghurst garden. An entirely white portion in an otherwise colorful landscape provides the same effect as a bag of white litter thrown on the lawn: unattractive and obtrusive. For a white garden to succeed, it needs to be set off from the rest of the landscape, as Sackville-West stated in describing her own garden: "I should like to use the old word garth for it, meaning a small piece of enclosed ground, usually beside a house or other building, for it is entirely closed, on one side by a high yew hedge and on the other sides by pink brick walls and a little Tudor house." The white garden at Sissinghurst owes much of its effectiveness to such a frame: Entering this enclosed space, and can have time to appreciate the gardens extremely subtle palette. The second key to creating a successful white garden lies in the realization that a white garden is not predominantly white, but green. The various textures of the foliage act as a foil to the stark-white blossoms, muting their brilliance with a calm verdancy. Nature abounds in greens: the dusky green of yew, the emerald glow of box, and the glaucous chartreuse of lady's-mantle all work together to play up and pacify the attention-seeking white blossoms. Gray-leaved plants, such as lamb's ears, santolina, and artemisia, also perform a beneficial role: Used in moderation, these "almost whites" act as a bridge between dark and light and serve to link the two serenely together. For those planning a white garden, there's one other design quandary lurking among the delphiniums: After you've determined the right setting for your garden, and have chosen a balanced selection of plants, the process of working with white flowers themselves can prove a few varieties of white flowers in a vase; immediately it becomes clear that, as with green, there are infinite shades of white in nature, and the brilliant whites of an Oriental lily can make the creamy white of an obedient plant or foxglove, for instance, look "dirty." In the absence of color, foliage shape and texture also come into much more prominent play than you might otherwise expect: In an all-white garden, the eye is particularly drawn to the shape, color, and texture of the leaves, of which certain combinations work together extremely well, and others equally dash. You have to be willing to play with a white garden. A single-color garden, to quote Sackville-West again, "is great fun and endlessly amusing as an experiment, capable of perennial improvement, as you take away the things that don't fit in, or that don't satisfy you, and replace them by something you like better ...." If this sort of artistic tinkering doesn't summer Saturdays, then you'd best not attempt a white garden. Understanding all the challenges white gardens pose, you might fairly assume that gardeners devoted to ease and practicality would never attempt such a fussy thing in their own gardens. But if you do, you underestimate the allure of the all-white garden. Last year I, too, succumbed and began to convert an area off my terrace into an all-white garden. I chose the site for its sense of enclosure, and its proximity to the house allowed me to wander out at the end of a long day's work or after dinner to enjoy the quiet calm of this orderly, fragrant swath of white. I can't say that the first year of this garden was an unqualified success, but I intend to continue planting, moving, and experimenting until I achieve a satisfying balance of color, texture, and form. Photograph Left: Alyssum (front), nicotiana (middle left), astilbe (back, left), and petunias: Sweet cicely, stachys, arabis, and snow-in-summer; love-in-a-mist; phlox foliage, sedum, and Artemisia schmidtiana Silver Mound' (foreground). Photograph Left: Subtle differences in hue and height create visual interest. The willow-leaved pear (Pyrus salicifoiia, background) lends height to low-growing nettles (Lamium maculatum' Album', foreground, and Stachys byzantina, middle). // Recently a friend stopped by as I was trying to figure out just the right positioning for a clump of cimicifuga. "Ah," she said, "working on one of those white gardens? What could be easier? It's just white." "Yes," I responded, casting her a withering look as I resolutely moved the cimicifuga for the fifth time, "it is just white." Photograph Sidebar white flower collection Sidebar We are pleased to present Country Living readers a trio of white flowers (below, left to right): Hesperis matronalls' Alba Plena' This cultivar of Sidebar dame's. Blooming in late April and early May; hardy in Zones 3 to 8; sun to partial shade. Leucanthemum x superbum' Crazy Daisy' This Shasta daisy cultivar blooms in midsummer and demands little more than well-drained soil. Zones 4 to 9; full sun. Aster ericoides snow Drift' Growing in a low mound only four to six inches high,' Snow Drift' covers itself in white flowers from early September to October. Zones 3 to 9; full sun. The White Flower Collection, which includes two' Alba Plena' and one each of the others, is $34.95, plus $6.95 S &H.; To order, call (800) 413-9746 and ask for Item #303779, Dept. CL811. Plants will be shipped to addresses in the continental United States only, between mid-August and mid-October. This offer ends October 1, 2001. -M.W. Author Affiliation Gardening Editor Michael Weishan is principal of Garden Works Ltd., a landscope design firm in Southborough, Mass. (**25;547;TOOLONG). //
COUNTRY COOKING Headnote Here's to a healthy, happy New Year-one that's all about what you can enjoy, not what you can't Headnote Nutrient-rich lemons, olive oil, tomatoes, red wine, garlic, onions, leafy greens, salmon, and soy are fabulous foods that not only taste good, but can also keep you healthy. PHOTOGRAPHY BY CHARLES SCHILLER. WRITTEN BY MAUREEN CALLAHAN. PRODUCED BY CHERYL SLOCUM AND CYNTHIA NICHOLSON. Photograph Photograph // January is often a month filled with lofty pronouncements about what we shouldn't or mustn't eat. Every year we pledge to turn over a new leaf and repent from holiday indulgences. This year, instead of focusing on deprivation, look forward to adding healthful foods like red wine, salmon-even chocolate-to your menus. We have packed these and other superstar foods into tantalizing recipes like Roasted Garlic Soup and a spicy "Hot" Chocolate Cake. With dishes so appealing, it's easy to forget that the ingredients harbor good-for-you "phytonutrients," substances credited with warding off everything from the common cold to So make a New Year's resolution to indulge in foods that taste good and just happen to promote good health. It's far from a bitter pill to swallow. FOOD STYLING THROUGHOUT BY PAUL GRIMES. PROP STYLING BY BETTE BLAU. Above: Whole roasted onions stuffed with creamy parsnip puree and topped with a sprinkling of toasted walnuts and pungent Roquefort cheese are satisfying alone or alongside roasted meats. As a bonus, onions pack a big dose of "flavonoids," a subclass of phytonutrients that might help ward off certain cancers and protect the heart. Left: The omega-3 oils in salmon are thought to promote healthy arteries and may also help treat depression and rheumatoid arthritis. Health benefits aside, there's no quicker weeknight supper than our Pineapple- and Soy-Glazed Salmon. Slipped into the oven, it cooks in less than 10 minutes. The glaze includes a fermented soybean paste, one of whose phytonutrients, isoflavone, seems to mimic estrogen and could prevent breast and prostate cancers. citrus Photograph // citrus Above flavors are a result of a marriage of sweet-tart preserved lemons and fresh whole lemons, buttery olives, fresh herbs, and tomatoes. Lemons contribute high amounts of vitamins C and B, which aid in the prevention of stomach cancer. All citrus fruits (especially the peel. as used in this recipe) contain generous quantities of disease-fighting phytonutrients. dark leafy greens Strips of smoky bacon and sauteed collard greens are tossed with a warm vinaigrette for our Hot Collard Slaw. Easy to make but complex in flavor, this side dish is loaded with nutrients that keep your eyes and bones healthy Preliminary research indicates that dark leafy greens support the immune system and may ward off certain types of cancer. These greens are also rich in folic acid, a nutrient critical for fighting anemia and preventing some birth defects. garlic, tomatoes, and olive oil Top left: For a good punch of infection -- fighting garlic, which also lowers blood pressure and may help prevent stomach cancer, serve up bowls of Roasted Garlic Soup. soothing texture. Lycopene, a powerful cancer-fighting antioxidant, is abundant in the tomato -- whether raw, cooked, or dried. Our Fire -- Roasted Tomato Soup (easily made with canned tomatoes) becomes a savory weapon against cancer. Top right: Bagna Cauda, a pungent dip, is loaded with heart-healthy olive oil and antioxidants. Plunge crisp vegetables or crusty bread into this warm blend of oil, anchovies, and garlic. Right: Made with an olive-oil crust and a drizzle of herb-infused olive oil, our Tomato and Camembert Tart provides a double dose of a healthful Ingredient. FONDUE POT (TOP RIGHT): BODUM. FOR RESOURCES, SEE ADDRESS INDEX. chocolate Above: That one of life's great indulgences, chocolate, might also prove beneficial to health is good news, indeed. And what better way to enjoy those benefits than in chocolate cake? We call this one "Hot" Chocolate Cake because it pairs rich cocoa and bittersweet chocolate with a hint of spicy cayenne pepper-a warming choice chocolate is extracted seem to have the same powerful antioxidants found in red wine and tea. At last, chocolate can be enjoyed fully guilt free. PLEASE TURN TO THE RECIPE FILE IN THIS ISSUE TO PREPARE THESE DISHES. red wine Below: The well-publicized health benefits-reduced risk of heart disease and cancer-associated with consuming a moderate amount of red wine daily don't come only from sipping a little cabernet or merlot. Cooking or reducing wine concentrates its flavors without altering its potent antioxidants, called phenols. So add red wine to a winter dessert like our Spiced Figs in Port Wine. Port, a fortified wine, is simmered with honey, dried figs, and spices to create lusciously soft fruit and a thick, burgundy-colored syrup that adds complex flavors and dramatic color to a serving of frozen yogurt. Photograph Photograph Photograph //
AT HOME AND IN HER COZY SHOP, DARLENE DUGGAN LOVES THE COMPANY SHE KEEPS // sunday mornings at 7:00, Darlene Duggan begins her trek through Fort Lauderdale's Sunrise flea market. Her 110-pound frame wheels a cart piled high with crystal chandeliers, architectural salvage, chenille bedspreads, American art pottery, and other pretty things. Some of these finds will be sold in her Delray Beach, FIa., shop, Nanny's Attic, but others are destined for display in her home. Within this minty, pastel world, fabrics and vintage accessories tell the tale of her passion for all things floral, while a Lu-Ray shrine, safeguarded on custom-designed shelving, celebrates her mantra: "There is never enough." She shops eBay for certain items, but Darlene prefers cruising the markets in person, especially for that elusive bluefooted Lu-Ray pitcher she is still determined to find. And while each and every item was acquired purposefully and joyfully, the one pleasure Darlene truly could not live without is her son, Tom. handcrafts The ladies who crafted these berry purse 10 cents each, Darlene got an instant collection. est. value: $6-$10 each lu-ray Darlene feels that pink is hardest to find. A pitcher could fetch $70; a dinner plate, $15. Her collection of 657 pieces is another story. est. value: $10,000 buttons An old or rare button-made of Bakelite or mother-of-pearl-can be expensive. A jar of grandma's colorful castoffs does suffice. est. value: $12-$15 per jar inside nanny's attic When shoppers visit Nanny's Attic, they stay awhile. Named for her nanny, Violet, Darlene's shop is another outlet for her creativity, as well as that of six tenants, all friends and former customers, who now hawk previously owned treasures and some new things, too. Together they share their finds at affordable prices. When Darlene's shop opened 10 years ago, the focus was on handmade crafts. Now, while she still sells stencils and fabric, this Delray Beach destination is a flea marketer's folly.
A once dingy kitchen is now bright, welcoming, and in complete harmony with its bayside setting // Sometimes, when you fall for a house it's really the location that tugs at your heart-you might call it "love at first site." Such was the case when Diana and Vincent Carvelli first saw their Mattituck, Long Island, home. Despite its spectacular white-sand-beach setting, the house was ordinary and the kitchen was no exception: dark wood cabinets, with just one small window overlooking beautiful Peconic Bay. "Right away I knew that view would have to become part of the kitchen," says Diana. With the help of New York City architect David Bers, the Carvellis embarked on a whole-house renovation that included a complete kitchen makeover. Architect and client worked together on the open layout that suits the Carvellis' casual lifestyle. "I wanted clean lines," says Diana, "something reminiscent of beach houses of years ago." The result is fresh and inviting-a place where grandchildren can roam and adults can lounge-efficient, and far from grandkids - "and that's what inspired the color scheme," says Diana. Sea-green glass tiles and Diana's collection of jadeite establish a watery theme. APPLIANCES Because the Carvellis regularly entertain their five grown children and eight grandchildren, they need hardworking appliances, such as the Bosch cooktop and a pair of Bosch dishwashers- "It's tough to get dishes for eight or more people into just one dishwasher," notes architect David Bers. MATERIALS Each work area gets its own surfacing material: marble for the cooking zone; stainless steel for the sink stand; and oiled walnut for the center island. "I encourage people to cut right on the walnut," says Bers. "You should allow surfaces to live and evolve." He recommends cleaning the wood with bleach every two months, then wiping the surface with plain mineral oil. FLOOR The surface underfoot was painted with a gray floor enamel. The color suggests beach-weathered wood, and the finish stands up to sandy feet. LIGHTING A pair of pendant lamps onto the island, doing double duty as ambient and task lighting. COOKING Every Fourth of July, the Carvellis' extended family gets together. They come from near and far to walk the beach, swim, and, of course, eat: burgers and dogs, traditional Italian fare, and plenty of fresh seafood. "They show up all day long, and they're usually starving when they get here," says Diana, laughing. She relies on her 36-inch oven under the cooktop (above left) to handle large trays of food when she's planning to serve a crowd. GATHERING The kitchen is the prime gathering spot. "Everyone participates in the cooking, and we usually just end up staying in here," says Diana. Personal effects such as the Statue of Liberty masks and the fish above the sink (shown on previous page) were collected over the years or pulled from The Yard Couple, the Carvellis' antiques store in Sag Harbor, N.Y. The blackboard (in the family. OUTDOOR LIVING "In summer we're on the porch from morning until night," admits Diana. The children love to play in the sand and dip their feet in the water. She traded with a neighbor to get the trestle table on the porch (opposite) and the benches were originally in the home's entry. Flags are a yearly tradition. "I hang them a different way each year," she says. "There's also one at the front of the house to greet everyone as they arrive." Sidebar "What's inspiring about country houses is their functionality," observes Bers. He replaced the typical base cabinets throughout the kitchen with glass-fronted drawers reminiscent of 19th-century apothecary cabinets. The practical design makes it easy for guests to find dishes when helping out in the kitchen. Bead-board wainscoting on the backsplash reinforces the relaxed effect. SEE SHOPPING GUIDE FOR DETAILS. Sidebar "I love clean, simple lines. It's really conducive to relaxed, beach-house Four days a month the sleepy town of Rosemount, Minn., swells with passionate shoppers eager to strike a deal at HAUPT ANTIEK market // Deb Haupt has a story that starts out quite familiarly: Collector-turneddealer breaks into the business by unloading "extras" from her garage. These "cleanouts" featured good buys on vintage items mostly culled from estate sales. Deb advertised; other dealers came to sell, too. Held tri-anually, the sales became much-anticipated events. Then, in May 2003, Deb and her husband, Greg, expanded their business into a c. 1900 three-story house, on a half acre in downtown Rosemount, Minn .. six miles from their home in Eagan. With 2,200 square feet now devoted to Haupt Antiek Market, Deb opens four days each month with a new theme and about 17 regular dealers. Says Deb, "We have something tun and different each month to make it a great experience." Greg adds, "The work required is worth the end result." Each dealer has a house key, and comes and pitch in and work. All involved share a deep sense of trust, camaraderie, and commitment. Deb particularly loves the European buying trips and the marketing and publicity. But when it comes to visual merchandising, she passes the baton over to St. Paul-based retail stylist (and occasional dealer) Christine Hoffman (this page, middle). Christine pulls it all together, and even dabbles in catering. Deb feels lucky to have amassed the giving and talented personalities that make up this bewitching brood. Sidebar It's opening day at Haupt Antiek. October's theme is "Colors of Fall." The air is crisp, the mood is charged, and there's something good to eat. Pumpkin-studded grounds are full of farmhouse finds; inside, dealers display their wares. SEE SHOPPING GUIDE FOR DETAILS. Sidebar There's something for everyone on Deb's mailing list of 4,000! European and American antiques include farmhouse, shabby, primitive, cottage, and industrial. Expect to score large furnishings and countless smalls, glass, pottery, and paper items. BOTTOM RIGHT: To make the candleabra, dealer Brenda Weber combined garden wire with wine glasses and votives. "It's an amazing group," says Deb Haupt. Word of mouth and a shared obsession bring this group of Minnesotans together. Some are in for just a month, others for years. Several dealers have shops of their own, sell at other shows or on eBay. Deb loves what each brings to this community. HOP OVER TO HAUPT FOR... GOOD BUYS, such as ironstone ($6 and up), vintage ephemera (flash cards start at 50 cents), paintings and old frames (far right), Brenda Weber's typewriter-key bracelets ($48 each), and Cottage House's painted pumpkin pails ($24). GOOD EATS are always on hand. For fall, display whiz Christine Huffman filled peat pots with a seasonal jumble of nuts, candy corn, and M &Ms; (see page 124), and served up. A GOOD TIME! Haupt Antiek Market, 14690 South Robert Trail (Hwy. 3), Rosemount. MN 55068; (651) 329-3871 or (651) 452-4910. Open Thursday to Sunday, once a month. For a show schedule and directions, log on to hauptantiek.com. //
On this cool winter day, the porch of the old house is festive with laughter and talk and decorations of the season. The porch of the Greek Revival house is crowded, too, with Ben Kleinpeter's large family -- and with the memories and stories of the home's long history. For more than two centuries, the Kleinpeters have celebrated Christmas in South Louisiana. And since 1895, when Ben's great-grandparents bought the cottage, holidays have centered around t this simple house built of cypress and heart pine. Though beloved as a family homeplace, the home's true history wasn't discovered until Ben, a student of Louisiana history and decorative arts, moved the house. "When my father died in 1984, my brothers and sisters gave me the house," he explains. "I decided to move it back 1,000 feet to be away from a commercial area. When we did that, I saw the house I was a lot older than we had originally thought. That motivated me to restore and refurbish it for my home. with H. Parrott Bacot, executive director of The LSU Museum Complex and curator of the LSU Museum of Art." "He and his wife, Barbara, did 95% of the research," Ben says. Working with the Bacots, he learned the original house was built as a Greek Revival-style cottage around 1870. As the house was being restored, Ben traveled through Louisiana and Mississippi, looking for appropriate furnishings. Even before the major pieces, such as a Natchez dining table, were in place, he filled the house with his collection of 19th-century Louisiana landscape and sporting paintings. Though the house is on the National Register of Historic Places, it's still very much a family home, and homeplace to a large extended family. "My father was one of 11 children, my mother was one of 12 children, and I am one of 11. All of us have happy memories of this house," Ben says. "When those who have moved away come to Baton Rouge, they On New Year's Eve, Ben hosts an annual fireworks display for the generations of aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, and cousins. He serves hot dogs along with chocolate milk from the family's well-known dairy. "One year the oldest person was 93, and one of my nieces had a little baby only 8 days old," says Ben. "It was a pretty good spread." This year the celebration of family ties will go on as always -- with one change. Ben's daughter, Sue Ann Cox, and her husband, James, are owners of the home and keepers of the family's history and heritage. "I was ready for something else in my life," says Ben, who recently moved to a patio home nearby. "My main idea was to continue the house in the family and to educate my grandchildren to appreciate our history. Sue Ann will do that." "My father has created a wonderful tribute to the history of Louisiana with our strong family heritage, makes this home a very special place. Great times were shared by all of us, and those memories are very dear. James and I, along with our son, Robert, look forward to carrying on the family tradition."
Evocative of timeless Virginia architechture, our Idea House in Fredericksburg deftly blends principles of the past with a livable floor plan and lively interiors. // Central Virginia reveres its history, its heritage, and its architecture. Homes were built to be passed from one generation to the next. This respect for the past and aspiration for the future inspired our Idea House in Fredericksburg. Residential designer William Poole took as his model the Shepperd House, an 1817 Federal structure downtown. "I looked for a house that has an expression, a house that lifts the spirit," says William. "Then I modified the plan for the present." Our updated version, called The Shepperd House, is nestled in the 2,800-acre community of Fawn Lake. In the living room, a mingling of timeless architectural details and contemporary touches instills a fresh, energetic quality. Richmond designers Deborah Valentine and Janie Molster started with a furniture arrangement that plays off the rooms fireplace and symmetrical bookcases. A square ottoman grounds the seating arrangement, including a pair of matching love seats. tomes, Janie and Deborah took a novel approach. They mounted four velvet panels to resemble old-fashioned portieres (heavy curtains hung across a doorway) which break up the walls of shelves and soften hard edges. Amid this neutral room, a Wolf Kahn painting over the mantel adds color. SHERWINWILLIAMS Your home is one of your most important investments. Quality paint and decorating supplies are essential. Sherwin-Williams professionals have provided generations of homeowners with the knowledge and experience it takes to transform an ordinary home into a spectacular one. Deck-care products, window treatments, floor coverings, paint, and wallpaper supplies make SherwinWilliams the industry's leading one-stop decorating source. For a store near you, call 1-800-4-SHERWIN (474-3794). Old Meets New Our Idea House reflects the grace, grandeur, and presence of a stately old home while offering a comfortable, contemporary floor plan. William started with a typical Federal floor plan and updated the layout with a sense of openness and flow between rooms. "Federal architecture is a very precise the most rigorous styles can be adapted for the way a family lives today." Photograph // At the heart of the house, the family room (above) is filled with rich colors and deep tones. A few big pieces of furniture with interesting shapes fill the space. A large framed opening onto the kitchen takes advantage of the family room's natural light. Maple cabinets provide an upbeat background for commercial-style appliances and concrete countertops. A counter separates the cooking area from the spacious breakfast area, where an antique tile-topped table sits comfortably in a light-filled bay. Galvanized tin lanterns enhance the room's play of old and new. INSIDER Photograph Photograph // INFORMATION Not every window requires draperies. The bay in the breakfast area opens onto a private backyard, so the designers opted to showcase the view. JENN-AIR For creative cooks who want a kitchen to reflect their sense of style, Jenn-Airs BLUE CREEK M line of appliances is perfect. You will find products from the Blue Creek and PROSTYLETM lines creating the Idea House. Loaded with valuable features, the Blue Creek 48-inch six-burner cooktop, shown in champagne gold, features downdraft ventilation, 16,000-BTU E-VEN HEATTM grill burner, nonstick grill grates, and interchangeable accessories. For more information on JennAir's full line call 1-800-JENN-AIR (536-6247). Dining Room Family meals and formal dinners have changed over the years, and our dining room offers a refreshing twist on tradition. "We wanted the dining room to be a foil to the living room," says Deborah Valentine. "And we love the drama that comes from combining formal elements with the unexpected." Photograph Photograph Photograph // The dining room was the stage for Deborah and Janie to have a little fun. They started with a crystal chandelier and elegant silk draperies hung at the crown molding to accentuate the room's 10-foot height. An Irish, pine pub table on the diagonal introduces the surprise. INSIDER INFORMATION Elegant does not necessarily mean fragile. Important window treatments should be timeless. Use either solid or tone-on-tone the decor. Instead of a traditional tablecloth, we dressed the pine table with a cinnamon-colored, lined, silk throw. An arrangement of assorted fruits and vegetables and a tall cluster of roses add the finishing touch. LENNOX INDUSTRIES Lennox air conditioners are at the top of their class when it comes to quality and efficiency. Send summers pricey energy bills on vacation by using a product that rates highest on efficiency. Visit an independent Lennox dealer to learn about these products that deliver comfort. Call 1-800-9-LENNOX (953-6669) for a dealer near you. ORIENTAL PERSIAN RUGS DIVISION/ WORLD OF CLOTHING Turkey, Pakistan, China, and India are just a few of the locales where these rugs originate. At World of Clothing, select from more than 35,000 rugs including traditional Persians, French Aubussons, needlepoints, and more Visit stores in Hendersonville, North Carolina, and Gaffney, South Carolina. Call -800-759-9739 for a catalog. Exterior William Poole brings refreshing insight to the rules of proportion and scale that are fundamental to classically, starting with strong, welcoming details. Wide steps lead to a raised front porch graced with a wooden baluster railing. A series of Corinthian columns suggests refinement, while four sturdy rocking chairs loosen the formality of the generous outdoor space. TO ORDER PLANS Photograph // Order working drawings for The Shepperd House (Plan SL-9708-918), part of the Historical House Collection, from Southern Living Plans. Turn to page 146 for details. BOARD BENCH PROJECT Seating couldn't be simpler. Sometimes called six-board benches, these were found in homes, shops, and gardens across the colonial South. As the name implies, each bench consists of two legs, two aprons, and two boards for the seat-six parts in all. The aprons and legs were frequently cut in decorative patterns. Our step-by-step plans show a variety of options. The example shown here measures 4 feet long, but the plans show other lengths too. To order detailed instructions, send a self-addressed, stamped, businesssize envelope to Board Bench Project, 35201. Include a check for $3.50 payable to Southern Living. Allow at least four to six weeks for delivery. Exterior As builders have done for generations, we chose brick for its lasting appeal. Flemish bond and ornamentation modified for current building practices enliven the facade. The scale of the two flanking wings is deliberately reduced; they're covered in white clapboard and as a result don't detract from the brick detailing. Photograph RESIDENTIAL DESIGNER // Windows were chosen to correspond with stock sizes and the traditional proportions of the house. Wooden muntins add authenticity. POZZI WOOD WINDOWS To illustrate the sense of tradition associated with the Virginia Idea House, natural Pozzi Wood Windows were selected for their classical presence and historical character. Offering more than 4,000 wood windows and doors, Pozzi can help you express your taste and bring out your home's specific style. Call 1 -800257-9663, ext. SLAV. REWARD WALL SYSTEMS Energy efficiency, consistent indoor temperature, and moisture resistance are a few benefits in a home built with, expanded polystyrene (EPS) forms and then filling the hollow core with vertical and horizontal rebars and concrete, For a dealer near you call 1-800-468-6344. COUNTRY ESTATE FENCE With this full line of virgin polyvinyl products, all traditional maintenance halts. Choose from more than 30 fencing styles for home and garden. Country Estate Fence will never chip, crack, or peel and will never need to be painted or scraped. Call 1-800445-2887, or visit the Web site at http: //www.country estate.com. Create a Masterful Retreat A beautifully appointed master suite with his-and-her baths completes the first level. To give this spacious retreat its own identity, Deborah and Janie chose a West Indies look. Wall-to-wall sea grass covers the floor, and flowing linen draperies emphasize the room's tropical feel. The generous dimensions of the bedroom called for a focal point. Deborah and Janie chose a queen-size sleigh bed with a caramel-brown tufted headboard and footboard. INSIDER INFORMATION Bones of the room are earth tones. Accessories provide the accents and colorful to the furnishings. White linens never go out of style. They are crisp, cool, and always inviting. On a practical note, whites can be laundered and bleached. THE PALMER HOME COLLECTIONTM BY LEXINGTON FURNITURE Our furniture reflects the basic values of quality, integrity, and endurance that exemplify golf legend Arnold Palmer. The Palmer Collection by Lexington Furniture includes more than 200 designs. Style and design were influenced by Winnie Palmer's background in interior decorating and the couple's extensive travels. For a dealer call 1-800LEX-INFO (5394636), or use the Internet at http: // www.lexington.com. KOHLER CO. The BlRTHDAYTM bath is the perfect complement to the historic flavor of this house, having the character of an antique with all the features associated with modern construction. The nation's leading manufacturer of plumbing products Kohler will ensure that your bath is safe functional and attractive. Call 1 800-4-KOHLER (456-453). Children s Bedrooms Upstairs, three bedrooms open off a bowed balcony overlooking the family room. In, often reserved for more sophisticated spaces, offers a playful background. A cheetah-print carpet anchors the room, zebra and leopard accent pillows complement the crisp white bed linens, and a carved wooden elephant and giraffe stand guard on an old-world chest. Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph // In the girl's room, a delicate pink toile wallpaper and painted antique bed set an old-fashioned, feminine mood. As a counterpoint, cheerful seersucker shades with pink-and-green tassle trim animate the two large windows. A dressing table and a floorlength swivel mirror provide the perfect place for a special little girl to play dress-up. SERVICE MERCHANDISE Whether you like the classic or contemporary, Sen ice Merchandise provides the right accessories for a room to look great and fit your sense of style. They have done the footwork for you. From accent pillows to name-brand electronics, Service Merchandise has options available for adding that touch of personality to any home. For a store nearest you, call 1-800-362-8979 or visit the Web site at http: //www.service merchandise.com. with trend-setting features. The cabinets, from Canac Kitchens are placed at a height of 36 inches, about 4 inches higher than standard. The added height suits the classic look of the Phoenix door style. Featuring a surplus of storage space, the cabinets contribute to the updated look of the homes classic design. Call 1 -800CANAC-4-U (226-2248). Photograph Photograph Photograph //
Long before architect Robert Epps began work on this Charleston single house, the property had earned a rich history. It was built in 1730 for Thomas Bee, a notable figure in the colonial government and a leader of the American Revolution. In the mid-1800s the house became a player in the march toward the Civil War when Nullification Documents were signed in the library. In more recent times, the house underwent several alterations, including the addition of ornate moldings, the enclosing of an upstairs porch, and the construction of a masonry structure connecting the main residence with a service building behind. These modifications masked the original simplicity and elegance of the residence. Robert addressed all of these problems in the final project, but the process began with a more modest endeavor: The owners wanted to modernize the cramped kitchen. In the domino effect that touches many remodeling jobs, enhancing the kitchen sparked ideas of improving adjoining areas. Such plans led to opening the space and creating a stronger relationship with the outside. While restoration work in the historic main residence was done a separation between the main house and the service building. The space provided by the connection is too valuable. Instead, the remodeled section was designed to be clearly distinguishable as contemporary, thereby creating a sense of visual separation. "I like to mix old and new things in anticipation that they both will be appreciated more in contrast," Robert says. This is not to say that the new doesn't take a few cues from the old. Marble flooring in the kitchen and sitting area, for example, coordinates with the grayand-white floor of the adjacent loggia. Similarly, Robert designed the steeland-glass structure to echo, not strictly match, the proportions of traditional, double-hung windows. //
The appeal of this new Greek Revival home comes from its balance and scale. Photograph Attention to detail ensures this new house is both historically accurate and visually appealing. Architect Ankie Barnes was faced with modifying a model house designed by Stephen M. Banigan .. The front door was positioned off to one side, inspired by classic rowhouses in historic cities. // The details of a well-designed house are like the lines of a fine jacket," says architect Ankie Barnes. Although it's not always easy to pinpoint the particular traits that make a house or an article of clothing so pleasing to the eye, Ankie believes "you just know it when you see it." One doesn't need to be an architect or even understand the theories of design to know what looks good. Traditional styles appeal to most people because the forms and details are familiar and engaging. But there's another reason classical architecture has endured for thousands of years. The ancient Greeks and Romans designed buildings with proportion, scale, and symmetry that today still possess an unquestionable sense of a human scale, which can actually make one feel more comfortable either inside a room or viewing a building from afar. For this new house in Washington, D.C., Ankie used historical models to establish the overall scale of the building, the details, and the way the elements all come together. His design for Mary Dickie and Leslie Dach combines a welcoming face to the street with a livable floor plan for an active young family. A PROPER PORTICO Historically, Greek Revival homes in the South often featured an entry porch less than the full height of the house. Today, a classic portico still serves two important functions: to clearly mark the front door and provide shelter. "A doorway should be welcoming, and the scale should not be too grand," says Ankie. "Except for the closest of friends there's a sense of awkward anticipation before ringing the doorbell. The architectural message should be one of open arms." Photograph "Sidelights soften the formality of a solid front door" says architect Ankie Barnes. The pattern of the muntins adds interest from both sides. Double-hung windows are simple and proportioned. True divided lights lend an appropriate scale. "Even the size of the panes is based on human scale," explains Ankie. "The dimension is close to the size of one's hand and head." For continuity, architectural details along the side and rear of the house echo the style of the front. "Even a back door deserves a few welcoming touches," Ankie says, such as the three-pane transom at this secondary entry. Rather than ornate classical columns, simple square pillars support the portico, more in keeping with the scale of the house. "Nothing is worse than a cheap round column with bad proportions," says the architect. // Ankie recommends a depth of 4 feet and a width of 6 feet as good minimum dimensions for a porticolarge enough for two couples to feel comfortable. "If too shallow, someone might fall backwards during adds. The scale of this portico also echoes the uncomplicated architectural elements that might have graced a modest country house in the early l9th century. Columns have been modified by builders for generations, but to capture the harmony of a classical column there are certain rules that must be followed. The column shaft should always align with the outer edges of the entablature (the horizontal beam that rests above the two pillars), and the capital trim should extend out beyond this line. Standard lumber and stock molding can be used to create pillars that are historically accurate and appropriately scaled. The one shown above was crafted of typical 4 x 4 framing with 1-inch clear trim molding; traditional crown and other moldings were used for the base and capital. Equally important is the proportion of the entablature in relation to the house and components of the portico. Its scale must correspond with the height and width of the pillars. Don't skimp on the details, warns Ankie, or your portico will look like it got For sources turn to page 211.) Reference THE RIGHT PROPORTIONS Pages 150-152: Architecture by Anthony Barnes, AIA, Barnes &; Vanze Associates, 1238 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Suite 204, Washington, DC 20007, (202) 337-7255; original house plan before modifications by Stephen M. Banigan., Architect, 3201 New Mexico Avenue, NW, Suite 250, Washington, DC 20016, (202) 364-2603. //
Now part of the Gulf Islands National Seashore, Mississippi's Horn Island inspired the work of a captivating artist from Ocean Springs. Photograph Change first rule of life on a barrier island. but e yen alter 35 years you can still see the scenes on Horn that spurred 11alter An? (l-son to paint. Photograph // If a place belongs forever to the one who loves it best, then Horn Island belongs to Walter Anderson. For two entire decades, from the midforties to the mid-sixties, the Gulf Coast sea island served as subject and inspiration for the Ocean Springs artist. He journeyed there alone in all seasons and through all weathers. Sailing and rowing for hours at a time, often battling wind and tide, he would cross Mississippi Sound-10 miles of open water-in a bare-bones skiff scarcely longer than a canoe. Once there, Walter would stay for weeks on end, sleeping under his rough-plank boat, subsisting on fruit, rice, and canned goods and feasting on the island's untamed beauty. Every day he would sketch or paint at a in graceful lines and bold colors, any image that blessed his eye -- birds, animals, shellfish, flowers, butterflies, wind-sculpted dunes, salt-stunted pines. With Horn as his singular muse, he produced thousands of drawings, watercolors, and words that lay bare the island's wild soul. ON THE MAINLAND I first heard of Walter Anderson and Horn Island in the early eighties when I stopped into the split-level showroom of Ocean Springs' Shearwater Pottery. There, on display, stood some of the stoneware he had decorated for the pottery business his brother, Peter, started in 1928. Struck by his elegant designs, I bought a silk-screened print-two regal pelicans perched side by side-and a hardback copy of The Horn Island Logs of Walter Inglis Anderson. The print intrigued me with its textured patterns; the book-taken from the daily journals he recorded during his frequent island trips-enthralled me. He wrote eloquently of the island, of what he saw and experienced. I resolved to learn more about the man and visit: "There are some wonderfully strange trees on Horn Island," wrote Walter Anderson in his logs, "years of storm and years of sudden growth, one side retarded and the other growing like a vine ...." // Walter Anderson's story is a complex one. Fired by a consuming passion to create and afflicted with manic depression, he followed an unconventional path. The closest thing he ever had to a regular job was at the pottery. Still, as years went by, he gave himself more and more to his private art and Horn Island, living between trips as a recluse in a ramshackle cottage at Shearwater. That self-imposed exile and his mental illness made life hard-for both him and his wife and children. Residents of Ocean Springs mostly regarded him as the local eccentric, watching his erratic comings and goings with amusement or, perhaps, disdain. His family and friends forgave his sad, strange isolation and left him to his work, but when he died in 1965 he was little of art was the act of creating, not the result or the fame. Last year, when I at last returned for my Horn Island visit, I discovered just how remarkable and prolific he was. His daughter Mary Anderson Pickard, an artist in her own right, took over as curator for his estate in the seventies. To her fell the task of cataloging his astonishing body of work. "I got to the point where I actually felt that somebody must have been putting more things in," she told me in her soft, melodic voice. "My brother had a huge closet in which everything was kept, and every time I'd go to it I'd find something that I didn't know was there." She laughed, shaking her head in wonder. "That was my father's bounty; it was just like a fountain." Determined efforts by Mary; her mother, "Sissy," before her; other family members; and a core of admirers recent years critics in such publications as Art in America and Smithsonian have compared his work to that of van Gogh, Matisse, and Georgia O'Keeffe. Indeed, he is regarded as a 20th-century American master, a first-rank watercolorist who possessed exquisite command of light and line. Nowhere do those gifts shine brighter than at the Walter Anderson Museum of Art in Ocean Springs. The museum's modern exhibit halls, with cathedral-like vaulted ceilings and clerestory windows, connect two older buildings. Those structures themselves are literally the artist's grandest creations. Entering the larger of the two, the town's Community Center, struck me as an Alice-in-Wonderland experience. It was like stepping into a painting, for he had neglected not a single inch of the vast space. All four walls, floor to ceiling, of the 100-foot-long room vibrated with motion and color. Photograph LEFT: One of Walter Anderson's grandest achievements is the mural he painted on the walls of the Little Room, now part of Ocean Springs' Walter Anderson One thing that has always struck me about this room is that everything glows. "ABOVE: Walter Anderson's last boat anchors the museum's Horn Island exhibit. // It took Walter Anderson 15 months to paint this massive mural, which he did as a public service in the early fifties for a sum of $1. It was, he felt, his civic duty to provide the public with quality art. His theme blended area history, mythology, and nature, and in the details -- pelicans in flight, a black bear climbing a honey tree, an alligator at rest, eagles locked together, everything -- I found the same repetitive use of patterns I so admired in my own print: circles, semicircles, spirals, diamonds, zigzags. "Mere are few rooms like this in America," said museum director Clayton Bass as he introduced himself, "and that's an understatement." He explained how Walter Anderson employed those symbols as a visual alphabet to build images. "Anderson his life. His color sense is amazing too. Everything is very translucent." All of these images are the result of careful observation, "Clayton continued, spreading wide his arms to take in the entire 360 degrees." These really are certain kinds of flowers, certain kinds of plants. Even though he is very sure of hand and very quick in his depiction of things, he's not just making it up. "The Community Center, his most public art, serves as prelude to his most private in the other of the two buildings. The Little Room, once a part of Walter's Shearwater cottage, wasn't discovered until after his death. It represents, however, the ultimate synthesis of his art and his devotion to nature. Stirred by the 104th Psalm, he used oils left over from the Community Center to trace the passage of a Gulf Coast day on its board walls. The room barely measures 10 paces wide by 12 long, but what he rendered there, the museum's director, stands in a brilliant corner of the Community Center, whose walls were painted by Walter in the 1950s. Photograph Horn Island possesses miles of beach and inland trails to explore and enjoy. // Standing in the room's center, I imagined him working by himself, slapdashing these brilliant, yet precise, images on the grainy wood, never slowing to correct the drips or runs of bright paint. The flares of a rising, orange-yellow sun encircle the east window. To either side, a pair of sandhill cranes and blue jays, colored to perfection, wing their way upward. The south window marks noontime. An arcing rainbow heralds storm's end, and a doe, unmoving, stares out as if she has just spied me in the forest. Black skimmers dive past lightstained clouds toward the west window's sunset, and across the north wall's dark night flies a collection of vivid moths." One thing that has always struck me about this room, "has a kind of vibrancy, like an aura. He didn't just paint an object; he painted the object, the space around it, and how the two interacted somehow." He directed my gaze back to the single deer, outlined in flamboyant yellow. "He didn't just show you how the object looked; he showed you how the object feels. He essentially painted the life force." IN SEARCH OF WALTER ANDERSON The absolute best place to learn about this fascinating artist is in the Walter Anderson Museum of Art at 510 Washington Avenue, Ocean Springs, MS 39564. Permanent exhibits highlight the whole range of his ability and accomplishments. An award-winning video, The Islander, provides an insightful introduction to his Horn Island years. Plus, a new exhibit, entitled "Vanishing Point: The View From Horn Island," will be on display September 29-January 21, 2001, and will include a wide range of Anderson's island-inspired work, along with island photographs by Dr. Donald Bradburn. Through September, hours are 9:30 a.m. -5 p.m. Monday-Saturday and 12:30-5 p.m. on Sunday. Starting October 1, the museum closes daily at 4:30 p.m. For additional information call (228) 872-3164, or visit the Web site **28;332;TOOLONG. Plus, you may turn to page 28 to learn more about Walter Anderson in Ocean Springs. Making the trek to Horn requires advance planning, because there is no regular transportation to this wilderness island. Locals tend to visit the island on a day-trip basis, but camping is allowed. You just need to bring everything, including plenty of fresh water. The National Park Service awards licenses for charters to the islands. To obtain a list, contact the Gulf Islands National Seashore at 3500 Park Road, Ocean Springs, MS 39564; (228) 875-0821. TO THE ISLAND His art grafted onto my mind, I met Walter Anderson's youngest son, John, down by the water early the next morning. With John at the helm of his 21 foot and set course for Horn. Photograph LEFT: American Indians and pelicans in flight share one of the panels in the Community Center's mural. In them, it's easy to pick out symbols Walter routinely employed to compose his images-circles, spirals, zigzags, and diamond shapes. ABOVE: In tracks left in the island sand, you can see other patterns he used. Top: Ospreys, called fish hawks by Walter, nest on Horn. // The island stretches about 14 miles in length and ranges from 1/2 to 1 mile in width. Like most barrier islands, it consists of beach, dunes, marsh meadows, and a thin interior of scrub forest, ponds, and lagoons. A scarcity of freshwater, the intense sun, and rabid mosquitoes, gnats, and flies make Horn and its brethren less than hospitable in some seasons. It has been inhabited previously, but since being designated a wilderness area of the Gulf Islands National Seashore in 1978, it has been left to the wild service ranger. Tall, lean, and blue-eyed, John Anderson looks strikingly like Walter. Indeed, he inherited his father's heart for the island, and for a time he served as Horn's first ranger. He talked of that, his family, and the island's almost mystical power as he steered the boat into the wind and the waves washed past the bow like a sigh. "As a teenager," he remembered, "I sailed out here by myself in a small boat for a couple of weeks. It was a very tumultuous, intense experience, but I ended up with something that I feel has helped me a lot in life. I came back from that experience no longer an observer, but a participant." That same transformative power touched Walter Anderson. "To Daddy, Horn Island was as much a state of mind as a state of place," said John. "He got to heaven, to a kind of perfect peace, by going some then being totally in that place." We reached that place, the shores of Horn Island, just after the midmorning sun shattered a bank of low, gray clouds. AN ISLANDER'S LOG "There are places on this island where they alone are worth coming to see," Walter Anderson wrote in a log from February 1959. On a Saturday, five months later, he added, "One image succeeds another with surprising regularity on Horn Island." He called those images "realizations," regarding them as gifts from Providence. He scrambled to see and record such moments, and I found myself doing the same. We set up camp, a cluster of neat, small tents, by Teal Lagoon on the sound side of the island. The tidal water rushing through the lagoon's shallow mouth ran clear and cool, a welcome contrast to the noon air. Hermit crabs, shouldering their cumbersome shells, stumbled along water's edge. Many looked as fine as jewels, striped in such spindly creatures. Crossing the lagoon, we ambled toward the island's east point, only to encounter the next broad stretch of beach, littered with the abandoned carapaces of horseshoe crabs. I picked up a small one, perfectly intact down to its spike of a tail. Thin as paper, brittle, and bleached to the color of faded parchment, it had the aspect of an ancient relic. Just behind the dunes rose a stand of tall pines. Alerted by the constant, highpitched cries of ospreys, we counted at least four huge nests, unkempt tangles of sticks and branches wedged in the treetops. We watched one bird return from the hunt, carefully circling to land with a flourish. In its beak was a mouse. Photograph BELOW: John Anderson, Walter's youngest son, sails to Horn Island every chance he gets, choosing the approach his father before him preferred. // Back in camp, as afternoon waned, we watched a pair of least terns go through their mating, wings beating rapidly, would hover above the water searching for fish. Then he would abruptly dive, snatch up his prey, and return with the silvery prize flashing into the afternoon light. Despite all the effort, the female remained unimpressed. The setting sun tried to dye everything orange: the sky above it, the water, the sand. It seemed for an instant all the earth was afire, except for a ragged purple band along the horizon. Later, near midnight, the wind quartered to the north, and my tent began to bow before the gusts. Awake, I walked along the shore to find phosphorescence in the water. Tiny meteor showers glittered across each breaking wave; mesmerized, I watched for over an hour. Later I angled the tent so the breezes could enter through the door and exit by a window The wind sang me back to sleep. The next morning we hiked west down the island, then south across to the wide, empty outer beach. You. We spied at a distance a pair of bald eagles, distinguished in silhouette, perched in a lofty pine that overlooked a tannin-stained lagoon. We swam in the blue waters and were joined by a school of cow-nosed rays. Moving in formation, they glided around us at an unhurried pace. Thrilled by the chance encounter, John's friend, Linda Kerr, voiced my thoughts. "After spending time here, it's easy to understand Walter Anderson. I yearn to come back. I always yearn to come back." Photograph ABOVE: During his stays on Horn, Walter Anderson would wade and swim through the marshes and lagoons in search of subjects and experiences to paint. LEFT: Even the whimsical toys Walter made for his family's children are works of art. Photograph LEFT AND BELOW: Mary Anderson Pickard, Walter's oldest daughter, has helped bring recognition to his work, while pursuing her own art interests. BOTTOM: In his logs, Walter described this time as "the" //
From Blue Angels to space shuttles, Florida has a rich history in aviation and space exploration. Military installations in Pensacola and Fort Walton Beach have given rise to fascinating collections of aircraft memorabilia, while the John F. Kennedy Space Center in Titusville has opened windows into the universe. // Board a glass-bottomed boat at Silver Springs, or dip a paddle into the waters off Amelia, Captiva, or Sanibel Islands, and you'll experience the natural heritage of Florida. Sip a glass of free juice at one of the orange groves that sell fruit fresh from the tree, or savor a succulent red treat at the Strawberry Festival in Plant City, and you'll taste the agricultural heritage of the state. Watch with your heart in your throat as a space shuttle rumbles into the sky over Kennedy Space Center. Stop for a cup of sweet coffee at a hole-in-the-wall cafe in Miami's Little Havana. Climb to the top of the Ponce de Leon Inlet Lighthouse. Or scour Caspersen Beach, just south of Venice, for fossilized sharks' teeth, and you through the colorful tapestry of Florida's heritage. Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex is your key to the past and future in aerospace exploration. See films and exhibits, and budget time for one of the bus tours, either of the space center or Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Watch a space shuttle launch from the NASA causeway (tickets are available from the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex). Other good viewing areas include Port Canaveral, where the cruise ships anchor; Jetty Park at Port Canaveral; off State AlA along the Atlantic Ocean in Cocoa Beach; and on the Bee Line Expressway (State 528). Launches are scheduled for February 15 and April 19. For updates and launch information, contact (321) 867-4636 or www.nasa.gov. Photograph // Highlights of the Astronaut Hall of Fame in Titusville include numerous historic artifacts as well as personal mementos of the astronauts. Look for the 30-foot mural painted by Apollo astronaut Alan Bean, Gus Grissom's space suit, and a Mercury capsule that carried one Valiant Air Command Warbird Museum in Titusville displays restored aircraft, along with artifacts from WWI through Desert Storm. Visit March 9-11 and you can also see the Valiant Air Command Air Show, featuring aircraft in aerial demonstrations. The Air Force Armament Museum on Eglin Air Force Base in Fort Walton Beach has historical aircraft exhibits, including a B-52 WWII bomber. The National Museum of Naval Aviation, at the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, is one of the largest air and space museums in the world. View the A-1 Triad, the Navy's first biplane; four of the Blue Angels' A-4 Skyhawks suspended in a diamond formation; and more than 100 other historic aircraft. Photograph Photograph // Fantasy of Flight in Polk City brings aviation history to life through flight simulators and the world's largest private collection of vintage aircraft. Step aboard a B-17 Flying Fortress, or experience the incredible sensation of piloting an F4U Corsair. Watch projects in progress yearround at The Flying Tigers Warbird Restoration Museum in Kissimmee. This working HERITAGE Warm sun, mild weather, and rich soil combine to make Florida a grower's paradise. Citrus and strawberries grown here are popular among consumers throughout the country. Some citrus grows in the Indian River area, which starts just north of Daytona Beach and stretches more than 200 miles south to Palm Beach. Most, however, grows in an area known as "the Ridge," which runs down the center of the state from Haines City to Lake Okeechobee. Fruit stands and packing companies throughout these areas offer fruit for sale, and some even throw in a free glass of freshly squeezed juice. Indian River Heritage Center and Citrus Museum in Vero Beach tells the story of the county's citrus industry and its beginnings. Plant City bills itself as the "Winter Strawberry Capital of the World." The Florida Strawberry Festival, March 1-11, features entertainment, exhibits, and plenty of fresh fruit. COWBOY HERITAGE Cattle ranching in Florida can be traced back to the Spanish explorers who brought cattle with cover the flat scrub interior of the Florida peninsula from Kissimmee down to the Everglades. In fact, the state ranks 12th in the nation in the number of beef cows it produces. The Silver Spurs Rodeo in Kissimmee features professional cowboys in competition in February and October. Photograph Most of Florida's oranges grow in the center of the state. // Arcadia, an old cattle ranching town east of Sarasota, hosts the All-Florida Championship Rodeo in March, July, and October. Share a campfire and conversation with cow hunters at the re-created 1870s cow camp in Lake Kissimmee State Park. It was the cow hunter's job to round up strays in the scrub as well as unbranded cows and drive them to boats for the journey to market. MARITIME HERITAGE With more than 1,800 miles of coastline, Florida has an impressive maritime heritage, ranging from lighthouses to sunken treasure. The seagoing legacy continues today with cruises that depart from Port Canaveral, Port Everglades, Miami, and Tampa. To recapture the past and culture remains strong among the ranches that dot Florida's flat scrub interior. // At 175 feet, Ponce de Leon Inlet Lighthouse, just south of Daytona Beach, is the second tallest lighthouse in the United States. The original support buildings contain exhibits that include ship models, antique sextants, and several Fresnel lenses. The redbrick Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse is topped with its authentic firstorder Fresnel lens. The Cape Florida Lighthouse, which was spared by Hurricane Andrew in 1992, sits at the end of Key Biscayne, 6 miles from downtown Miami. The Key West Lighthouse and East Martello Museum rewards visitors with a great view of downtown. The St. Marks Lighthouse is located in the St. Marks National Wildlife Refuge on the Gulf Coast of Florida. Key West Shipwreck Historeum, on Mallory Square, tells the history of Old Key West. Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage Society and Museum in Key West contains artifacts recovered by treasure hunter Mel Fisher from the wrecks of the Atocha and the Margarita. Of the ten shelters built for House of Refuge &; Museum in Stuart is the only one left. ETHNIC HERITAGE The world's cultures paint a colorful legacy across Florida. More than 60 different ethnic groups have been documented by the Historical Museum of Southern Florida, and that's only the tip of the state. It begins with the American Indians who lived here when European explorers first arrived. Some tribes, such as the Timucuas, Apalachee, and Tequesta, disappeared centuries ago. Others, such as the Seminole and Miccosukee, now proudly share their culture and crafts with visitors to their reservations. Photograph Lighthouses are fascinating images of Florida's coastal history. Photograph Seminole Indians teach about their way of life in the Everglades. // The heritage of Africa, Europe, Asia, the Caribbean, and the Americas all come together in one glorious collage of customs, creeds, and cuisines. Here's a sample of ways to experience the ethnic heritage of Florida. African American The Annual Black Heritage Festival in New Smyrna Beach, February 24,, on Amelia Island, was founded by millionaire A.L. Lewis as Florida's first African American beach. It reached its heyday in the 1940s and 1950s. Look for Lewis' greatgranddaughter, MaVyne Betsch, who still lives there and loves to tell its story. Eatonville, a tiny community incorporated in 1887 just north of Orlando, is considered to be the country's oldest African American municipality Take a tour of the historic district, and be sure to visit the Zora Neale Hurston National Museum of Fine Arts, named for the hometown writer. The Jackie Robinson Ball Park in Daytona Beach was the site of professional baseball's first integrated game. A commemorative statue of Robinson stands at the entrance. Kingsley Plantation, near Jacksonville, was the home of Zephaniah Kingsley and his wife, Anna Jai, a freed slave who often ran the plantation in her husband's absence. Notable are the ruins of 28 slave cabins built of tabby. Daytona Beach preserves a number of African American heritage sites. Included is who advised Presidents and served as a consultant to the founding conference of the United Nations. You'll also discover Bethune-Cookman College, which Dr. Bethune founded in 1904 with $1.50 and five students. The Florida Sports Hall of Fame in Lake City highlights some of the state's greatest African American sports figures, including baseball's Andre Dawson and golfer Charlie Owens. ETHNIC HERITAGE Cuban The Historical Museum of Southern Florida in Miami features exhibits relating to Cuban history and culture. Photograph History comes to life at Castillo de San Marcos in St. Augustine. ABOVE: Items from the Holocaust teach a powerful lesson at museums in Miami and St. Petersburg. RIGHT: Splendid China brings replicas of Chinese landmarks and Asian talents to Central Florida. // Little Havana covers a 3.3-squaremile area west of downtown Miami. Explore Calle Ocho, or 8th Street, which is lined with Latin shops, restaurants, Cuban bakeries, and sidewalk cafes. Visit March 2-11 during Carnival Miami and Calle Ocho Festival, the largest Hispanicculture festival in the country., began in 1886 as a company town for the workers at Vicente Martinez Ybor's cigar factory. Head first to Ybor City State Museum to view cigar-makers' tools and exhibits related to the Spanish-American War. Enjoy a taste of Tampa along with flamenco dancing at Columbia Restaurant, Florida's oldest Spanish restaurant. Fiesta Day, February 10, celebrates the ethnic background of Ybor City with food, live music, and cultural exhibits. Jewish Jewish history in Florida dates to 1763, when Alexander Solomons, Joseph de Palacios, and Samuel Israel arrived in Pensacola. Today it reaches every corner of the state. The Ziff Jewish Museum of Florida in Miami Beach tells of the legacies left by David Levy Yulee, Florida's first US. Senator; Joe and Jennie Weiss, who opened Joe's Stone Crab restaurant; and Sanford Ziff, a businessman for whom the museum is named. The Holocaust Memorial in Miami Beach and the Florida Holocaust Museum in St. Petersburg remember the worst human tragedy of the 20th century. of the Everglades, features the Ah-Tah-Thi-Ki Museum, with exhibits and films on Seminole history. The Annual Seminole Tribal Fair is February 8-11 at the Seminole Festival Grounds in Fort Lauderdale. Miccosukee Indian Village, along U.S. 41 between Miami and Naples, includes a museum and several crafts demonstrations. At old Fort Pickens, in the Gulf Islands National Seashore on Santa Rosa Island, see where the Apache chief Geronimo was imprisoned in the 1880s. The Indian Temple Mound Museum, in Fort Walton Beach, explains this former ceremonial center of the prehistoric Mississippian culture. Photograph // Spanish The influence of Spain shines in St. Augustine's architecture, with terra-cottatiled roofs, low-hanging balconies, and narrow streets. See the massive Castillo de San Marcos National Monument, the largest Spanish fort in the country; the restored Spanish Quarter; and Plaza de la Constitution. The Menendez Birthday Festival and Noche de Gala, February 23-25, celebrates the anniversary of the birth of St. Augustine's founder. Fernandina Beach, named by King Ferdinand VII flags. The Amelia Island Museum of History unravels the story. Isle of Eight Flags Shrimp Festival, May 4-6, includes a folk festival, mock pirates landing, and art show. The De Soto National Memorial in Bradenton commemorates the explorer's landing in Florida in 1539. Around The World The Morikami Museum and Japanese Gardens in Delray Beach reflects Japan's living culture. The museum celebrates spring with special entertainment during the Hatsume Fair, February 24-25. Splendid China, just west of Walt Disney World in Central Florida, features scale-down replicas of more than 60 of China's most famous landmarks. Tarpon Springs owes its Greek heritage to the people who came from the Aegean Islands to dive for sponges. Learn about this industry at the Spongeorama Exhibit Center. Don't miss the beauty of St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Cathedral or the native food at local restaurants. Take a safari in Tampa at Busch Gardens' Serengeti Plain to see giraffes, zebras, and other animals native to Africa. World Showcase at Epcot in of 11 countries-Canada, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States. NATURAL HERITAGE From the beaches that drape Florida's shoulders like fine white lace to the rivers, lakes, and forests that reflect her soul, nature issues a powerful invitation to come and visit. Some of the most beautiful sand in the world draws sun worshipers to the northwest Florida coast. Here you'll find a string of delightful beach towns and resorts, anchored by such perennial favorites as Pensacola Beach, Fort Walton Beach, Destin, and Panama City Beach. Farther south, favorite haunts include St. Pete Beach, Bradenton Beach, Fort Myers Beach, Naples, and the enchanting islands of Anna Maria, Sanibel, Captiva, and Marco. Follow the Atlantic coast from Fernandina Beach south to where the Florida Keys hook westward like a line cast by a fisher into the Gulf of Mexico, and you'll be tempted by one lovely beach after another St. Augustine Beach, and Daytona Beach are the first to entice the wave of travelers along 1-95. Others, such as New Smyrna Beach, Vero Beach, Hutchinson Island, Jensen Beach, and Palm Beach, roll off the tongue as easily as sunscreen slides over skin. Then there's Fort Lauderdale, made famous by the 1960 movie Where the Boys Are; and Miami Beach, with its dazzling and fun collection ofArt Deco architecture, right down to the flamboyant pink lifeguard stations. Roam the coast or head inland from any beach area and you'll discover a wealth of natural treasures. Here are just a few to get you started. Nature's Highlights The Blackwater River, in northwest Florida, is one of the purest sandbottom rivers in the world. The last 2 miles of a designated canoe trail meander through Blackwater River State Park near Harold. Photograph // Canaveral National Seashore protects 24 miles of unspoiled beach on Florida's Atlantic coast. Between May and August, park rangers lead trips to look south of Venice, is known for the numbers of fossilized sharks' teeth that wash up onto the shell-laced sand. Finds range from 1/8-inch baby teeth to the occasional 7-inch behemoths. Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary, near Naples, protects the largest originalgrowth forest left in America. A towering combination of pond and bald cypress, it shelters 200 species of birds and nourishes everything from Florida panthers to 13 species of orchids and a rainbow of wildflowers. Sea World Orlando and the adjacent Discovery Cove park bring you face-toface, and sometimes hand-to-nose, with creatures normally seen only from a distance off the coast of Florida. At Sea World you can merely observe, or be a trainer for a day, stuffing vitamins into slimy salmon and feeding them to the killer whales. At Discovery Cove, which opened last summer, you can actually swim among the stingrays, cradle a dolphin in your arms, and snorkel with a rainbow of tropical fish. Crane Point Hammock, at Marathon in the Florida Keys, harbors an impressive tropical means "island of trees"). There are also nature trails, a saltwater lagoon, several small museums, and a small aquarium with touch tanks. Photograph Children go hand-in-hand with the sparkling white sand of Florida's Gulf Coast beaches. Photograph // J.N. "Ding" Darling National Wildlife Refuge on Sanibel Island has canoe and walking trails, plus a 5-mile scenic drive for viewing wildlife. The Everglades National Park covers most of Florida's southern tip. To appreciate the beauty of this fragile land, you need to get out on the walking trails, boardwalks, and canoe trails. One of the best ways to see it during winter months is to sign up for a watery walk escorted by a park ranger. Florida Caverns State Park near Marianna features a series of caves created by thousands of years of water dripping through the limestone rock. Gatorland, in Orlando, was a working farm for almost 50 years. Now look beyond the sideshows and you'll find an impressive array of alligators, crocodiles three-story observation tower, an elevated boardwalk, and along the meandering trails. Photograph RIGHT: See the Everglades from this observation tower in the Everglades National Park. BELOW: Rivers, swamps, and lakes invite exploration by canoe. Man and nature are peacefully one amid the glistening beauty of Fort Myers Beach. // Gulf Islands National Seashore, which stretches eastward from Gulfport, Mississippi, protects more than 50 miles of Florida coastline. It offers miles of beaches devoid of anything taller than the dunes anchored by scrub oaks and topped with sea oats. Homosassa Springs State Wildlife Park, a manatee rehab center, boasts an underwater floating observatory. Area dive shops take excursions to the Crystal and Homosassa Rivers where you can swim with the friendly herbivores. Photograph // Lakes Kissimmee, Okeechobee, Tohopekaliga, Wales, and Weohyakapka are noted for black crappie fishing. Loxahatchee River, Florida's only National Wild and Scenic River, winds through Jonathan Dickinson State Park near Hobe Sound. Paddle a canoe (rentals are available at river cruise aboard the Loxahatchee Queen II. Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge, part of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, is on the Atlantic flyway. Walk the trails, or follow the Black Point Wildlife Drive for a glimpse of waterfowl, alligators, and other wildlife. Paynes Prairie State Preserve, at Micanopy, encompasses 20 different biological communities. Climb to the top of the observation tower to view the area explored by 18th-century naturalist William Bartram. Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge, near Sebastian on the east coast of Florida, was the nation's first refuge, established by an executive order of President Theodore Roosevelt in 1903. At Silver Springs, glass-bottomed boats crisscross ponds fed by seven major springs, revealing a netherworld of waving eelgrass and darting fish. Tours also motor slowly down Silver River, past herons, egrets, ibises, and other waterfowl. Edward Ball Wakulla Springs State Park, south of Tallahassee, is one of the largest and deepest freshwater springs in the world. View it from a area where the movie The Creature From the Black Lagoon was filmed in the 1950s. The growth of Florida can be laid on the tracks of its railroads, and the two men most responsible for the state's rail industry were Henry Morrison Flagler and Henry B. Plant. Henry Flagler, one of the founders of Standard Oil, turned his energies to Florida after visiting and finding the transportation systems and hotels lacking there. He built a string of hotels along the east coast and connected them with his Florida East Coast Railway. Eventually, it extended all the way to Key West. Photograph Photograph The old Hotel Ponce de Leon in St. Augustine is now home to Flagler College. // While Flagler focused on Florida's east coast, Henry B. Plant bought up bankrupt railroads after the Civil War and ran his railway from Georgia to Tampa, where it connected with his steamship line to Cuba. His trains and ships transported soldiers during the Spanish-American War. And, imitating Flagler's success, Plant built three hotels places. Whitehall, the opulent 55-room house in Palm Beach that Henry Flagler built for his third wife, is open to the public as the Flagler Museum. Along with the lavish furnishings, you'll find exhibits of Flagler's life and accomplishments as well as American guilded age and railroad history. On the grounds is Flagler's private railcar. The Breakers in Palm Beach, a swirl of Italian Renaissance architecture, is the site of one of the hotels Henry Flagler built along his railroad line. To fully appreciate this attraction in its own right, take a guided tour with a resident historian. Flagler College in St. Augustine occupies the old Hotel Ponce de Leon, built in 1887. Tours, offered between May and August, feature a Tiffany sundial, stained-glass windows, the elaborately detailed rotunda and dining hall, and a statue of Henry Flagler. With plans for a hotel in Key West, Henry Flagler finished the Overseas Railroad in 1912. After his death, the hotel was completed by his trusted as the Wyndham Casa Marina Resort. The Henry B. Plant Museum in Tampa can be found on the first floor of the old Tampa Bay Hotel, which was opened by Plant in 1891. The hotel itself is part of The University of Tampa. The Central Florida Railroad Museum in Winter Garden has memorabilia in a restored 1913 railroad station. Pack your walking shoes or bicycle for a journey along the Tallahassee-St. Marks Historic Railroad State Trail. The entrance to the trail lies just south of Tallahassee on State 363 and was built on an abandoned railbed, 16 miles of which are now employed for hiking and cycling. For more information about heritage sites in Florida or for a copy of "The Official Florida Vacation Guide," contact VISIT FLORIDA at 1-888-7352872 or www.sl.flausa.com. Photograph Flagler College's dining hall is filled with unique architectural details. //
From the cooktop to the table, sauteing shortens your time in the kitchen. // Saute is one of my favorite techniques-it's energetic, cooks supper in less than 30 minutes, and lends itself to creative flavor combinations. The term "saute" means to quickly cook food in a small amount of fat in a hot pan, and it is surprisingly easy. If you've cooked onions in oil or butter to put in a casserole, you've got saute experience. This method is frequently used to cook chopped vegetables, but it also applies to cooking thin, tender cuts of meat and seafood such as boneless pork chops, chicken breasts, or fish fillets. When the directions say to saute onions, for example, we want you to stir constantly while cooking. When preparing meat, the food is usually turned once I saute frequently-for myself and for company, and definitely for the sheer fun of hearing that first sizzle as the food goes into the hot oil. When sauteing, watch and listen for cooking clues that tell you when to on page 176 for an explanation of these prompts.) After you finish a meat or seafood sauce, you can make a great sauce from the browned bits in the skillet. Just add a liquid, such as wine or broth, to loosen the bits-this is called deglazing the pan. Then boil briefly to reduce, or thicken, the sauce. Great sautes start with a great skillet, so turn to "From Our Kitchen" on page 186 for hints on the perfect pan. Then follow our step-by-step directions to get the hang of this terrific timesaving cooking technique. SPICY CATFISH WITH VEGETABLES AND BASIL CREAM MAKES 4 SERVINGS PREP: 25 MIN., COOK: 25 MIN. This recipe, developed by Laura Martin of our Test Kitchens, shows the versatility and creativity of sauteing. // CHICKEN SAUTE WITH ARTICHOKES AND MUSHROOMS MAKES 4 SERVINGS Photograph Spicy Catfish With Vegetables and Basil Cream is cooked in one skillet in about 30 minutes. // PREP: 20 MIN., COOK: 25 MIN. Pound chicken breasts Thinly pounded breasts cook faster and sometimes require a larger skillet. When you finish this sauce by adding butter and capers, remove the skillet from the heat. If left on the heat, the butter melts, separating and thinning the sauce. // STEAKS WITH CARAMEL-BRANDY SAUCE MAKES 4 SERVINGS PREP: 5 MIN., COOK: 10 MIN. This recipe cooks the steaks to medium-rare doneness. Lower the temperature and increase cook time for more well-done steaks. // SIX STEPS TO SAUTE SUCCESS 1. Get Off to a Hot Start To saute in a small amount of fat means about 1/8 inch of fat. Butter adds great flavor, but it has a low smoke point, meaning it burns quickly. So when the milk solids (the white foam you see) just start to brown, add the food. Don't substitute margarine for butter; because margarine contains water, it will steam the food rather than fry it. A great solution is to use vegetable oil and butter for heat control plus flavor and can withstand high cooking temperatures. Olive oils labeled "virgin" or "pure" also hold up to heat. Extra virgin olive oil tends to burn quickly. When the oil in a hot pan shimmers, it's time to add the food. 2. Take Your Time When food is added, the skillet and oil temperatures fall. Add ingredients gradually, so you hear a constant sizzling sound. We've all seen pros using some fancy wrist action to flip the food in the skillet without using a utensil. It's dramatic; however, the skillet cools when taken off the heat, and the food cools when tossed in the air. 3. Beautifully Browned For a crispy, browned crust, lightly dust meat or fish with flour, breadcrumbs, or cornmeal just before adding to the hot skillet. To saute without breading, pat juicy meats, poultry, or seafood dry with paper towels (excess liquid will cause the oil to pop). Season with salt, pepper, Add the first piece of fish or meat, pretty side down (skin side up on fish) with the thickest portion in first.You'll hear a fast sizzle that will slow as the temperature drops. Bubbles of oil or butter will form all around the food. As the temperature rises, the sizzle increases. Add the next fillet (leave 1 inch of space around each-a crowded skillet steams rather than crisps). Expect splatters on the cooktop when the temperature is correct. 5. Time to Turn When the fillets look done around the top of the sides, it's time to turn. Give the pan a shake. Food should release and slide when it's ready to turn. Flip it with tongs or a spatula, and continue to cook until done. Then remove it from the skillet. If the food doesn't release easily, you skimped on the oil or the pan wasn't hot enough. 6. Capture All the Flavor Add a liquid such as whipping cream, wine, bits of coating from the bottom of the skillet. For a stronger flavor, boil the added liquid until the volume reduces by half. Add delicate herbs lust before serving for fullest flavor. Photograph Saute is a terrific cooking method for recipes that use tender cuts of meat, such as the fillets in Steaks With Caramel-Brandy Sauce. Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph //
As the weather cools, the City of Fountains comes alive. Come join us, and see all she has to offer. TRAVEL SOUTHWEST Photograph far left: The sparkling spray from the J.C. Nichols Memorial Fountain welcomes visitors to Country Club Plaza, above, left: In addition to the artists, musicians perform throughout The Plaza Art Fair. above, right: A tower of onion rings complements the rack of ribs at Fiorella's Jack Stack Barbecue. // A misty rainbow hangs in the air around Nichols Fountain and colors the edge of Kansas City's Country Club Plaza. The light spray cools our faces as we walk by, reminding us that autumn is just beginning to break summer's tiring hold. The season revives the city and saturates it with such a merry attitude that you'll find a festival here just about every weekend of the month. It is the perfect time to experience this vitality for yourself through K.C.'s offerings of delicious dining, artistic jaunts, and shopping excursions. Playing in the Plaza One of the most popular destinations in the district south of downtown. In 1922, J.C. Nichols built the plaza as the country's first suburban shopping center. Inspired by his European travels, Nichols modeled the buildings' architectural design on those from Spain, Italy, Portugal, and Morocco. Ornate towers rise from redtiled roofs, and ceramic mosaics wrap many of the walls. Fifty outdoor sculptures dot the paths among the plaza's 150 stores. The fourth weekend of the month (September 24-26 this year), the city blocks off several streets for The Plaza Art Fair. In its 73rd year, the juried show invites 230 artists to share their paintings, sculptures, pottery, fabrics, and other visual arts pieces. Four stages host jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock' n' roll musicians. Half a block is dedicated to children and features the Kids Art Workshop and the Kemper Street Museum, both full of hands-on activities. You'll also be tempted by the aromas emanating from vending booths set up by the plaza's restaurants in the plaza, be sure to request an outdoor table at Classic Cup Caf. With the feel of a European bistro, this is a great place for lunch or dinner. Ease the sweet heat from the signature spicy Thai chicken pizza ($10) with a glass of wine while you watch passersby. Photograph far left: The sparkling spray from the J.C. Nichols Memorial Fountain welcomes visitors to Country Club Plaza, above, left: In addition to the artists, musicians perform throughout The Plaza Art Fair. above, right: A tower of onion rings complements the rack of ribs at Fiorella's Jack Stack Barbecue. // Closer to downtown, Blue Bird Bistro serves up a menu featuring dishes made from organic and all-natural ingredients. "We are mainstreaming organic," says owner Jane Zieha Bell. "When people come here, they realize it's not some far-out concept. They say, 'It's like my grandmother used to fix years ago, because I can taste all the flavors. cheese mousse and arugula pesto ($7.50), and try the pan-seared salmon ($23) as an entre. Of course, you can't visit Kansas City without sampling the 'cue. One of our favorites is Fiorella's Jack Stack Barbecue, a near-fancy restaurant in a renovated freight house behind Union Station. Bypassing the soggy plates and greasy wax paper wrappers, Fiorella's opts for a more refined take on this city staple and is known best for their ribs ($13.45 half rack, $21.95 full rack). You'll want to start with a Burnt End Appetizer ($6.45) -end pieces of beef brisket seared on the outside and tender on the inside. Photograph above, left to right: This marks the 73rd year that the city has hosted The Plaza Art Fair. The event features more than 230 artists and plenty of hands-on activities for the kids, below: Freshly dipped caramel apples from Russell Stover usher in fall. // Venture into the Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art, and snag a immediately find the 110-painting installation entitled The History of Art by artist Frederick James Brown. His work interprets artists and art throughout the ages and is sure to serve as a conversation piece during your lunch of crab cakes ($15) topped with zesty avocado salsa and served with roasted red pepper coulis. Mosey Through Wonderful Museums While you're at the Kemper, take a free tour of the museum. A giant skylight in the center of the building shines upon a large atrium, and the light flows into the galleries. The bright and airy environment suits the collection of contemporary art, including works by such noted artists as Jackson Pollock and Georgia O'Keeffe. Before leaving, you may want to try to cheer up the Crying Giant by Tom Otterness, an 11-foot-tall bronze with his head in his hands out on the museum's lawn. Take a stroll back to your childhood with a trip through the Toy and Miniature Museum of Kansas City. Housed in an old mansion, the collection of antique toys and miniatures spans 33 rooms. We were fascinated by the world's largest marble display, but had our wives been along, they might have preferred the 100 furnished dollhouses and room settings. Something Sweet All those toys will make you feel like a kid again, so logically, your next stop should be a candy store. Get ready, though, because Russell Stover's First Quality Stores offer so many wonderful chocolates and candies, we're not even sure Forrest Gump could handle it. Headquartered in Kansas City, the chocolate and candy company distributes the best off the line (no seconds) to these shops' shelves and cases (visit www.russellstover.com for locations). Some of the stores serve hand-dipped Blue Bell ice cream in homemade waffle cones as well as caramel apples (starting at $2). Photograph top, left: Crying Giant, a bronze by Tom Otterness, bows his head outside the Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art. top, right: Caf Sebastienne, inside the museum, offers an artistic mural's airy galleries are great display spaces for its collection of contemporary art. // Shopping on the State Line One of our favorite antiques shopping districts falls at the intersection of 45th Street and State Line Road. (Yeah, one safe swerve, Toto, and you're not in Missouri anymore.) We especially liked Christopher Filley Antiques and Decorative Arts, which specializes in architectural and garden ornaments. You might also want to check out the large collection of Country French antique furniture and pottery at European Express, just down the street. Much of K.C.'s charm comes from the city's diverse people and flavors-merits attributed to its geography. Because Kansas City not only rests on the edge of the South but also at the heart of America, she enjoys the cultural influences of an entire country. For more information: Contact the Convention and Visitors Bureau of Greater Kansas City, 1100 Main, Suite 2200, Kansas City, MO 64105; 1-800-767-7700 or www.visitkc.com. Sidebar A MONTH OF FESTIVALS K.C. is one festive one of these. * Kansas City Irish Fest: Crown Center, September 3-5; (816) 274-8444 or www.kcirishfest.com. * Art Westport: Westport Road and Pennsylvania Avenue, September10-12; (816) 531-4370. * Fiesta Hispana: Barney Allis Plaza, September 11-12; (816) 452-4712 or (816) 835-1501. * Kansas City Oktoberfest: Richard L. Berkley Riverfront Park, September 24-26; (816) 691-2140 or www.kcoktoberfest.org. * The Plaza Art Fair: Country Club Plaza, September 24-26; (816) 753-0100 or ERROR? * 28th Annual Heart of America Quilt Festival: Crown Center, September 25-October 10; (816) 274-8444 or www.crowncenter.com. Sidebar WHERE TO STAY You'll find several hotels clustered in and around Country Club Plaza, one of the city's best shopping and dining districts. We liked the Hampton Inn &; Suites for its location and affordability, Rates range from $99 to $139 during the week and $95 to $125 on weekends; (816) 448-4600, Note: Rates increase the weekend of The
A lackluster living room was transformed into the most popular spot in the house. Savvy furniture arrangement and a new bookcase did the trick. Photograph Photograph Maggie, Molly, and Emily all play piano. A portrait of the three girls at the piano and the instrument itself were the inspirations for this redecorated space. // Often, the secret to creating a room that warms your heart and comforts your soul is no secret at all. A single item you own and love can jump-start a style. For Gwen and Jim Williams of Homewood, Alabama, the inspiration they needed was already in their very bare family room. Hatching a Plan "We wanted a place where we could sit down, curl up with a book, or listen to our girls play the piano," Gwen says. The couple asked decorator Sandra Lynn to let only two things guide the room's new decor: a glossy grand piano and a treasured portrait of their three daughters sitting at that piano. They also asked Sandra to design a floor-to-ceiling bookcase. The couple got their welcoming without a hitch. A Book-Lover's Dream When Sandra prepared a budget for Jim and Gwen, she asked how much money they'd like to spend on books. A custom bookcase was going to span one wall and range in height from 12 feet on each end to 14 feet high at its peak; Sandra would need plenty of tomes to fill the shelves. Jim and Gwen just looked at her questioningly, the way any self-respecting book-lovers would. "We had boxes of books scattered from our attic to my mom's basement," Gwen says. "We both love to read." On display, the books are like works of art. Designed by Sandra, with the help of carpenter Steven Coletta, the shelves echo the majestic windows on the opposite wall. Photograph // Library Style Steven used the same molding on the bookshelves that is on the windows to add to the authentic feel. The base-board that wraps around the room continues along the bottom of the bookcase as well. "it's always been there," Sandra says. A rolling ladder enhances the cozy library atmosphere while allowing access to books on higher shelves. The red oak ladder pushes in, flush against the shelves, when it's not in use. When needed, it pulls out at an angle for easier climbing. Photograph inset: The sun's rays threatened to damage the Williamses' grand piano, so the lid remained closed with a quilt draped across it. above: An Oriental rug pulls together the room's rich colors and creates an intimate seating area. // Comfort Zone Once the bookcase was complete, Sandra had the piano moved in front of it. The combination of extensive book collection and sophisticated instrument works perfectly together. Sandra also created a comfortable seating area. The portrait of the girls hangs over the new sofa and echoes the warm color palette. The walls are painted a creamy gold, topped with a rich glaze. The rug's red and chocolate tones are repeated in pillows on the tables next to the chairs, and matching apothecary lamps provide reading light. Lamps made from vintage balusters sit on either side of the sofa. Sandra positioned an antique console table, topped with simple accessories, in front of the large window. The end result is so enticing that it's hard to believe the room was once so empty. "We never went in there before," Gwen says. "Now, the girls go in there to read or do homework or play the piano. Somebody is in there almost all the time." Photograph // DECORATING BY THE BOOK Here are a few ideas for turning your tired bookshelves into a true focal point. * Begin with empty bookshelves. Start your arrangement on the shelf that is closest to eye level. * Rather than lining up all of your books side by side, stack some horizontally. * If a book has a beautiful cover you'd like to display, lean it at an angle or set it on a small easel. less strain on the bindings and keep them in their best condition. * Group your collection by similar color and size. * Arrange accessories in odd numbers. * Use a stack of books to add height to a decorative item. * Leave empty space. Every inch of the bookshelf does not have to be filled. * Bring the books forward to the edge of the shelf instead of pushing them against the back.
Brigitte von Boch has turned a neglected farm property in Germany into a hotel as charming as the lady herself BY CATHERINE CALVERT Photograph As the wife of Villeroy &; Boch's CEO, Brigitte, left, had her pick of the company's fine goods when she renovated Linslerhof, above. She also has an unerring eye, which shows in every delightful detail. // Nighttme at the old manor of Linslerhof, and the night noises are as they have been for a thousand years. The stomp and chomp of the horses comes from the stables, and a flap of wings signals an owl off on its evening tasks. Somewhere, a dog bays at the stars sprinkled over its head, and a cow ruminates, as shutters are latched with a click. A few of the old, low buildings with their orange-tile roofs now shelter dreamers instead of sacks of grain, however. In one window, a light still shines as a bather soaks in a deep tub; in the next room, riding boots lie sprawled next to the bed, while their sleep with a sigh. And as these guests settle in, Brigitte von Boch-whose grand design has created this luxurious hotel from a rambling collection of farm buildings-settles herself for the drive home over the sharp little hills of the Saarland, in Germany's western corner. Linslerhof is von Boch's project and pride, the place where she has exercised her considerable taste and surpassing charm to create a small country-house hotel on one of the many properties belonging to the von Boch family. That's Boch as in Villeroy &; Boch, the ceramics company celebrating its 250th anniversary this year-and one of Europe's most successful commercial empires. To Americans, Villeroy &; Boch means elegant table settings, but the company's factories, in France and Germany, also produce tiles and bathtubs as well as crystal and, yes, beer steins. Brigitte's husband Wendelin, a member of the eighth generation to run the family company, is CEO and manages the tableware division. Brigitte, who had her own fashion boutiques in Frankfurt before corporate connections at the family homestead in Britten, but until recently had never run a hotel. She raised her four children with an emphasis on the countrified life the von Bochs have always enjoyed deep in their forested estates, but she also kept a house in London, shopped in France and busied herself with charity work. Then the idea for Linslerhof occurred. "If I'd known then how hard I'd work now, perhaps I'd never have begun," she says with a laugh, but anyone who's followed her, long-legged in leather, at a fast pace over the 1,384 acres of the Linslerhof estate knows some project would have engaged her. The manor house and farm here had been in the family since 1860, though its roots were much older; the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa hunted these forests 800 years ago, and the nuns followed. ("Nuns always knew the best places to live," says Brigitte. The air, the water, the lay of the land these days isn't particularly profitable, so when Brigitte met a forester who wanted to start a hunting school on the old estate, she was immediately interested.The von Bochs had been hunters for six generations: "Our attics were full of antlers," she says. So she cleared one of the barns for a classroom and hired the forester to start the state-of-the-art seminars, opening the school in April of 1994. Soon so many prospective hunters arrived that she began thinking about housing them. "There simply weren't enough good hotels in the neighborhood," explains Brigitte. The Saarland, near the heavily industrialized Ruhr, is not on the tourist route, though the villages that crown the hilltops are charming, and green forests meet rolling fields as you trundle along the country roads. Brigitte looked at the eleven farm buildings that cluster together like a small village, horse barn next to hay barn next to manor house, and saw a hotel. She started renovating the rambling main house, once the estate, I knew just what I liked in a hotel; most of all, I wanted it to be informal, where guests would feel as if they were at a house party. Brigitte, whose sense of style is as natural as her wide and ready smile, could only produce something special. Of course, Villeroy &; Boch bathtubs and tiles, glassware, cutlery and china were at hand. But the clever remodeling was all her own; she preserved the fine old beams, created a whitewashed interior with polished floorboards, and began to fill it. Her style is amusing and lighthanded, and inspired by what lies around her as well as by what she's seen on her travels. Curtain rods of iron end in cowshaped finials, and if she can find a toile with animals cavorting on it, she'll order a bale. Certainly, there are some fine pieces of traditional German furniture, but when, for instance, she wanted pretty but utilitarian pieces like headboards, desks, wood furniture with borders seemingly cut by pinking shears, so pieces could be painted or left plain to make each room individual. "I just thought it might work," she says. And her experiments, combined with a dash of wittiness, enliven every corner: the painted faux-marble columns and the checkerboard bathroom; the hunting-horn light sconces and the mural, which details a medieval hunt, in the grand salon; the tiles in the dining room that have footprints of animals imprinted in the clay. "I wanted to tell people not to worry about their shoes;" laughs Brigitte. Photograph Linslerhof plays against type by being both country-house hotel and hunting lodge: in the Hubertus Saal, scenes from a medieval hunt ring a formal salon. // By September 1994, the first rooms were ready, and last June a new renovation brought the total to forty-seven rooms, tucked into the manor house and a neighboring former granary, each bed with Gummi Bears on the pillow and billowing white duvets to dive her idea of the perfect hotel; she's just opened a spa with massages and aromatherapy under the high rafters. "It's so peaceful," she says, "so filled with a pleasant spirit, like a church." Her son Oliver is launching a catalog in the spring of 1999 that will carry all that's needed for the country life, from English tweeds to cachepots for the roses. Even the ancient little pilgrimage chapel has been restored down to the last angel-it's still the place for weddings and the annual blessing of the animals. Many of the hotel guests are still hunters -you can see them studying away under the glazed gaze of a stuffed moose-but anyone who likes the country life will feel comfortable here. Linslerhof is a favorite with German visitors in tweeds, whose BMW's and Mercedeses line the car park year-round, happy to fill the lungs with fresh air and the night with sound sleep. This is still very much a working farm; it's fun just to walk sixty-five horses there, or watch the 240 Aberdeen Angus clump like storm clouds in the pasture. Those in search of the hardy life will find horses to ride, and there's a nine-hole golf course nearby.As far as shopping is concerned: the Villeroy &; Boch factory outlet isn't far. The food is so good at Linslerhof that the dining rooms themselves are reason enough to visit. Brigitte renovated a former stable in country style-big open fireplaces, cheerful checked curtains, buttery-stucco wallsto house three restaurant rooms ranging in formality from a bierstube to a salon fit for a party. Hunting trophies from the attic line the walls, interspersed with old pictures of the von Boch family-look for a very young Wendelin astride a very fat pig. Here, as everywhere, Brigitte has worked on every detail, even designing a new pattern that Villeroy &; Boch made up for her tables. Candles on iron standards circle the massive pillars, where green boughs are tucked at Christmastime, and each season's flowers fill the corners. restaurant, the St. Antonius, has just been named one of the best in Germany, and here, as everywhere, the thoroughly regional is mixed with international touches. Sit down, and in winter you'll be met with a bowl of schmaltz, to spread on a piece of bread. "Oh, and you must try the beef," Brigitte says. "It's our own." And out comes a fillet so fine, so tender under its mustard glaze, that it melts away in your mouth in seconds. After enjoying a meal in the restaurant, Brigitte goes back to work. She's here almost every day, planning special events, consulting on the menu. (She is also busy transforming herself into the German Martha Stewart by writing books for son Oliver's new imprint, Ovb Publishing. Her first book, Weihnachten, which focuses on one of her country's great passions-decorating at Christmas-has just been published.) She whirls away, a swirl of blond hair and of the manor, whose manner is hands-on. Photograph In the Wedding Room-one of forty-seven cozy rooms in the manor house and its former granary-animals frolic across a cheerful toile. Brigitte designed the headboard. // Beyond the wonderful food, the warm welcome and the bathrooms that are broad expanses of sparking Villeroy &; Boch porcelain, Brigitte's pointed the way to "the real luxury in overcrowded Germany -- simply finding land to be alone in," she says, and opens the door to the fields and forest that surround the old house. Here, an early morning walk isn't quite solitarythere's the flicker of birds' wings, a curious Angus nosing through the fence, a wild boar or two in the underbrush-and in moments the quiet, the air, the haze of hills and swaying trees bring the ease of the outdoors, a fine contrast to the understated elegance within the walls of the house at ancient Linslerhof. Hotel Linslerhof Hotel Linslerhof is open yearround. Rates: $125, double occupancy. Linslerhof 66802 Uberrherrn.) 8070; fax: 80717.
What makes a suit so great that a man will cross an ocean for it? Quality is what it is all about: the difference between perfection and anything less. Since the first tailors moved into Savile Row in the early half of the 19th century, this narrow street in London's Mayfair district has been the mecca for seekers of traditional British, gentlemen's tailoring and today continues to set a standard for craftsmanship and elegance that is admired all over the world. But of all the extraordinary Savile Row tailors, Anderson &; Sheppard, Ltd., best exemplifies-and upholds-the bespoke experience. For nearly a hundred years, it has created fluid, flattering silhouettes for dignified statesmen and debonair stars, from Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., and Fred Astaire to Manolo Blahnik, Bryan Ferry, Calvin Klein and the Prince of Wales (hence the royal warrant engraved on its window). The secret: Anderson &; Sheppard's softly constructed jackets, which offer an ease of movement that created a revolution in men's tailoring long before Giorgio Armani. Basically, we explains managing director David Williams. While other tailors make a stiff shell and the body stands up inside it, we make a soft suit with a natural shoulder, which follows the form. Photograph Photograph Upstairs, downstairs: While Anderson &; Sheppard's retail space, on the ground floor of No. 30 Savile Row. opposite, is well known to clients, few ever see the seven rooms above. where much of the firm's extraordinary work is done. In these hushed quarters, fourteen tailors-including the one seen here in the coat workshop-painstakingly construct the suits that have made the firm a legend. // I was lucky enough to be introduced to Anderson &; Sheppard more than ten years ago, and I was immediately struck by the unimaginable comfort of the suit the firm made for me. After years of conventional tailoring, I delighted in being freed from a buttoned-up childhood -- in every sense of the word. To define the Anderson &; Sheppard experience: the suit jackets contain little or no padding on the shoulders. The way that the fabric is draped adds a slight fullness to the chest and back. The sensuous softness of the suit approaches that of a cardigan, but it never loses its appropriateness as business attire. The pleated trousers are cut comfortably full in the thighs but are tapered along the legs and have generous cuffs. The fit is sublime, and the overall effect is one of supreme elegance and comfort. In my Anderson &; Sheppard suits, I feel as handsome as Cary Grant and (almost) as ready to dance as Fred Astaire. Exuberant newcomers on the Row, such as tailor Richard James just across the street, may go in for acres of plate-glass windows and minimalist white space, but Anderson &; Sheppard retains its original 1920s mahogany paneling and fittings-and therein, too, lies some of its charm. A great barn of a shop, with bolts of cloth in its windows and piled high on massive tables, it has the hushed tone and distinguished but slightly faded atmosphere Shetland-tweed shooting socks, ties and country caps, as well as colorful felt and regimental-stripe braces, scarves, cozy sheepskin slippers and bright country-check lamb's-wool rugs and throws.Without expert guidance from your salesman, it would be impossible to choose from the marvelous selection of special fabrics used for suits, jackets, trousers and coats: Glen plaids, chalk stripes, pinstripes and herringbones, all designed exclusively for Anderson &; Sheppard, many since the 1930s. Rich Shetland tweeds and country suitings in subtle colors and patterns are a particular specialty. Once you have made your choice for a suit, the "cutter" -there is one for above the waist and one for below-then makes the pattern, and a tailor tacks together the material to prepare for your first fitting. From start to finish, it can take the five or six men involved in making your suit eight to ten weeks to accomplish the task, with two or three fittings. As befits its clientele, atmosphere and traditional approach, the firm has a reputation for ever discussing any detail regarding any customer (and quite understandably so-I wouldn't want my tailor saying a word, knowing the defects of my body as he does!). Anderson &; Sheppard is also steadfast in remaining among the few Savile Row tailors whose suits are made entirely by its own staff of tailors (either on the premises or from their home workshops) men who sometimes make suits for the same customer for most of their working lives. About 70 percent of the stitching is done by hand, including button- and cuff-holes; machine stitching is allowed only for a few seams and for darts and pockets.When at last a discreet label is stitched on the inside pocket, bearing the name Anderson &; Sheppard along with your own, your pursuit of sartorial perfection is complete. Photograph Photograph // Anderson &; Sheppard, Ltd. 30 Savile Rou; London WIS 3PT, 011-44-20-7734-1420; fax: 7734-1721; e-mail: **30;219;TOOLONG. Twopiece suits start at approximately $2,280; three-piece suits at about $2,600; dinner jacket and trousers at are exclusive of VAT.) In 2001 Anderson Fa &; Sheppard representatives will be visiting the U.S. in April (New York City, Boston and Washington, D.C.) and October (San Francisco, Chicago and New York City) to take orders. Photograph Photograph The art of suiting customers, clockwise from above: First, Colin Chapman, head of sales, helps clients select a fabric. Next, a pattern is made (and later stored in the pattern room, seen here). Then, John Hitchcock or another "cutter" -there are three for coats and two for trousers-cuts cloth from the pattern. Last, tailors sew the garment together, mostly by hand, "absolutely in the tradition we have always done," says managing director David Williams. //
ROBERT GOTTLIEB on the transformative power of a good read. // Books can change your life in different ways. Some touch a deep chord; some educate you; some lead you down new paths; some just make you happy. When I was nine or ten I was led to the books of Arthur Ransome, which, beginning with Swallows and Amazons, of 1930, have charmed and thrilled generations of English and American school-children. (They're still in print.) I had already gone through Albert Paysoii Terhune, of Lad: A Dog fame, but, although on the whole I preferred clogs to children in real life, Terhune wasn't a very convincing writer. Ransome's stories of the boys and girls who sailed the little Swallow and Amazon in England's Lake District were satisfying in every way. I didn't so much care about their actual adventures as about their realistic yet ideal friendships, their brilliantly individualized characters: responsible Captain John, practical Mate Susan, daring Nancy of the Amazon (with its audacious pirate flag) and to be. I read the twelve Ransome novels dozens-scores-of times. Today I realize they were less books that changed my life than books that were my life. At sixteen, I found Jane Austen's Emma (known to a new generation as the inspiration for Clueless). It was clearly a great novel, one of the first I had encountered, but what struck me then with particular force was not its overall quality but the famous picnic scene in which Emma - pretty, petted, spoiled, yet largehearted and generous-indulges her thoughtless wit at the expense of the kind but garrulous Miss Bates, shocking the other guests and earning a reprimand from the person she most admires (and eventually marries), Mr. Knightley. Instantly I saw in myself a reflection of Emma's deficient character. I've never come closer to blushing. That was the moment I realized I had better take myself in hand if I wanted to become a person I didn't have to be ashamed of. The book that changed 1961, having been in publishing for half a dozen years. Both the book and the abandoned enthusiasm with which we published it at Simon &; Schuster were spectacularly visible, jump-starting my career. Other successes (let's not talk about the flops) were to follow, but for decades-and eventually to my irritation-I was publicly identified as "the editor of Catch-22." In the more than forty years that have gone by, I've never reread it; I think I've been scared that I wouldn't love it now as much as I did then. People tell me I don't have to worry. In 1969, when I began working with Lincoln Kirstein, the great cultural impresario of our time, the man who brought George Balanchine to America, on a book about the New York City Ballet, I was unknowingly opening a door to the ballet world for myself. Lincoln co-opted me for City Ballet (I had been a passionate adherent since its first season, in 1948) and soon of the company, from programming the season to negotiating with the musicians' union (nobody asked me to dance). The book, called NewYork City Ballet, was the crucial gateway to this central part of my life. But beyond that, in Kirstein's account of the many ways he contributed to New York's cultural life-he was instrumental in founding the Museum of Modern Art and building Lincoln Center-I discovered the closest thing I've ever had to a role model. No wonder that one day, after a meeting at the ballet, I heard myself singing, "In my head I was thinkin' I could be another Lincoln if I only had a brain." And another, very different, world was opened to me when I worked for five years with Katharine Graham, editing her wonderful autobiography, Personal History. I had known nothing of Washington life; then-becoming close to Kay, frequently staying in her famous R Street house-I found myself in the yolk of the Washington egg. It was. And her book, published at the end of her long, rich life and confounding expectations with its frankness and fluency, wasn't just a revelation of Washington; it was a lesson for me-as it proved to be for so many others, young and old-in how you can (and must) reinvent yourself when life demands it of you. Author Affiliation Robert Gottlieb, former editor in chief of Simon &; Schuster, Alfred A. Knopf and the New Yorker, now edits and reviews books. He is also the dance critic for the New York Observer. //
A plan for wellness through the decades. // IN 1997 we produced a thirty-page report on all the ways women can stay healthy and active throughout their lives. Since then, the medical landscape has changed considerably. The Women's Health Initiative, the largest and most comprehensive study on the subject, has been completed, and although the data will be analyzed and published for many years to come, the study has already produced information that alters how we think about, and react to, some of our earlier ideas about health. We've sifted through the reports generated by the study thus far, as well as some other new and important studies, and interpreted the results for you in the following pages. Technology, medical science, mammograms and vaccinations can take you only so far along the road to health and longevity. Beyond that, your mother was right: eat your spinach, then go outside and play! 30s This is the time to establish the habits that will help prevent disease in the years ahead. FOR MOST of us, our with the demands on a woman tending to increase dramatically as marriage, children, work and an active social life converge, it's particularly important that healthy habits-good nutrition, exercise, adequate sleep and time for relaxation-don't get back-burnered now," says Dr. Kimberly D. Gregory, who oversees health-care-quality issues in the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, in Los Angeles. Another key health goal for the decade, says Gregory: putting together a complete record of your family's health history. By asking your parents, siblings and other relatives about illnesses, chronic disorders and causes and ages of death, you can give your doctor the full picture she needs to assess how best to stave off conditions for which you're at risk. "I don't recommend a baseline mammogram until age forty, but if there's a family history, especially before menopause, it's reasonable to get it sooner," says Dr. Amy L. Mitchell, an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University you're considering pregnancy, your family history may turn up genetic conditions that have a higher chance of being passed along to your children, such as Tay-Sachs disease, cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome. There's also a genetic component to autoimmune disorders such as lupus. Graves' disease and rheumatoid arthritis, in which the body's immune system attacks itself. Since these disorders are among the few chronic conditions that tend to target younger women and are notoriously hard to suss out, knowing your family history can make all the difference in getting a prompt diagnosis and treatment. Says Dr. Josiah Wedgwood, chair of the Autoimmune Diseases Coordinating Committee at the National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Maryland, "When you have a disease that affects different organ systems, presents with a wide spectrum of symptoms and waxes and wanes over time, it's easy to see a doctor for whatever the immediate complaint is but fail to see the bigger picture" of a chronic and possibly inheritable disease. HEART START With heart to protect your heart need to start early. "A healthy woman in her thirties should have a baseline cholesterol test that includes her levels of LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides," recommends Dr. Nieca Goldberg, chief of women's cardiac care at Lenox Hill Hospital, in New York City, and author of The Women's Healthy Heart Program (Ballantine, 2006). "If your lipids are normal, you don't need to repeat the test for five years, unless there's a change in your health, including weight gain," says Goldberg, noting that simply having a waist size of thirty-five inches or more increases heart-disease risk. An ideal cholesterol reading is an HDL greater than 50 mg/dL, triglycerides less than 150 mg/dL and an LDL less than 130 mg/dL (with an optimal level of 100 mg/dL or lower). Your doctor should monitor your blood pressure annually a nd do a blood-glucose test at least once a year, especially if you developed gestational diabetes during a pregnancy, protein tests (high levels can indicate heart problems). If any results are abnormal and/or you have other risk factors, expect to be tested more frequently, to change your lifestyle (reduce stress, increase exercise, quit smoking) and to take medication. TESTING, TESTING Screening in your thirties should include an annual gynecologic visit for a pelvic exam to cheek for any abnormalities in your uterus, cervix, vagina and ovaries; a clinical breast exam to look for suspicious lumps: and a Pap smear to rule out cervical cancer. The liquid-based Pap test (cells are suspended in a liquid fixative instead of placed directly on a slide), approved by the FDA ten years ago, has become the standard, says Mitchell. "Studies show that the new Pap smears are much more accurate, and they have the added advantage of enabling a doctor to test for HPV human papillomavirus," she adds. Since virtually all cases of cervical cancer are linked to one of about ten strains of HPV, a cancer-causing strain of HPV, in which case she would need to have Pap tests more frequently. (There are dozens of other strains that don't lead to cancer, including some that cause genital warts.) Two HPV vaccines-Gardasil, from Merck, and Cervarix, from GlaxoSmithKline-may be available soon. Gardasil is expecting FDA approval this summer, and GlaxoSmithKline plans to submit Cervarix to the FDA by the end of 2006. In a recent study published by the Lancet, researchers found that Cervarix induces antibodies that protect women for more than four years against the two strains of HPV responsible for 70 percent of cervical cancers. The study also found the vaccine (which is administered to girls before they become sexually active) effective against the third and fourth most common cancer-causing strains of the virus. Also to add to your annual calendar during this decade: twice-yearly dental cleanings (pregnancy hormones and infertility drugs dramatically increase your odds of developing gum discase) and a mole check by a dermatologist. In the past thirty, according to the Skin Cancer Foundation. MAYBE, BABY Recent years have brought several new contraceptive options. More women in Mitchell's practice are turning to Mirena, the updated IUD (intrauterine device). "The newer IUD dispenses a little progestin, which helps decrease menstrual flow," she says. This makes it a good choice for women with very heavy periods. Mitchell's patients also like the Ortho Evra contraceptive patch, which delivers birthcontrol hormones through the skin, though, like all hormonereleasing contraceptives, it may increase the risk for blood clots. Other new options: Seasonale, a pill that causes a woman to get just four periods a year; Yasmin, a pill that uses a combination of drospirenone (instead of progestin) and ethinyl estradiol; YAZ, the new twenty-four-day-active pill that also uses drospirenone; and the NuvaRing, a hormone-releasing ring placed in the vagina. Should motherhood be your goal, don't pass up regular screenings for sexually transmitted diseases if you're not in a sex in the past. "Chlamydia is an infection that can affect the Fallopian tubes, as can gonorrhea," says Dr. Jane Frederick, a reproductive endocrinologist at Huntington Reproductive Centers, in Laguna Hills, California. "They can cause infertility down the road." Screening for both can be done at the time of your Pap smear; a blood test can also check for HIV and herpes. The most important consideration in having a child is how old you are. "Thirty-five is the critical age," Frederick stresses. "Between thirty-five and forty, your monthly odds of conceiving drop to 10 to 15 percent." The most likely cause of otherwise unexplained infertility? Eggs past their prime. 40s Change is the hallmark of the forties-and it's both the upside and the downside. IF HEALTH in your forties is about anything, it's about change, says Dr. Lynn Westphal, director of Women's Health at Stanford University School of Medicine, in Stanford, California. Many of Westphal forty, she says, "they start to realize that this is something they should have thought about earlier." Dr. Jennie Ann Freiman, a physician in New York City and a member of the associate medical staff at Lenox Hill Hospital, also sees women in this age group starting to notice changes in-and the winding down of-their fertility. "In their mid-to-late forties, women typically begin to experience the symptoms of perimenopause, such as irregular periods, hot flashes, vaginal dryness, declining libido, weight gain (mostly in the belly area) and worsening of PMS-like symptoms and cramps." Fortunately, oral contraceptives can smooth out the hormonal highs and lows that cause most perimenopausal symptoms. Other physical transformations to expect in your forties: changes in vision, a slowing metabolism, an increased risk for gum disease, gastrointestinal problems as the digestive system slows and a decrease in skin plumpness and elasticity. "As we age, everything gets less resilient," says Dr. Sharon Lewin, an internist in private changes are the negatives of the decade, the good news is plentiful as well. We're likely to be more settled in our lives and more sure of ourselves. And there's still time to make adjustments to head off heart disease, diabetes and hypertension. "Lifestyle changes can be enormously helpful in delaying the onset of disease or preventing it," says Freiman. And nothing gives you more bang for your disease-fighting buck than exercise: five or more moderate thirty-minute workouts weekly have been shown to reduce the risk for all the major killers. The bone-protecting benefits of weight-bearing and strength-training exercise are particularly necessary for women in their forties, since bone loss accelerates greatly with menopause. It doesn't take a lot to make a difference: a recent study of 164 overweight or obese women aged twenty-four to forty-four showed that lifting weights twice a week for an hour slowed middle-aged spread and especially fat gain to the belly, which is most strongly correlated with heart disease. Just as important are nutritional changes-namely, produce; whole grains; lean sources of protein and dairy; and nuts, legumes and seeds. Maintaining a body mass index of 18.5 to 24.9 dramatically cuts your risk for the big killers as well as endometrial, breast and colon cancer and osteoarthritis, says the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Making changes like these now can spare you decades of frequent doctor visits, says Freiman: "You can take two drugs for hypertension, a couple of drugs for cholesterol, at least one drug for diabetes-or you can change your lifestyle and significantly reduce the number of drugs you'll need to be on later." TESTING, TESTING Now is the ideal time to establish some key baseline measurements that your physicians will use to properly prescribe for you a combination of screenings, lifestyle adjustments and treatments in the decades to come. So, in addition to your annual gynecologist visit to get a Pap smear (for cervical cancer), a pelvic exam and a clinical breast exam, add a forty. (Many gynecologists recommend that their patients do this even earlier, at thirty-five.) A recent study of more than 49,000 women found that digital mammography (versus film) was much better at detecting cancer in women under fifty, women with dense breasts and women in premenopausal or perimenopausal stages. "We found 28 percent more cancers in women who got the digital mammogram. so it's a lot more sensitive," says Dr. Etta Pisano, lead investigator of the trial and director of the biomedical-research imaging center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. But whatever kind of mammogram you have, don't give up your monthly self-exam: a 2001 study by the CDC of 1,619 women aged twenty to forty-four found that 71 percent of cancers were discovered by the women themselves, though mammography was much more likely to catch early-stage cancers. This is also the decade when knowing your family history truly begins to pay off. For Lewin, these records are the best reference point in deciding which screening relatives with adult-onset diabetes, then being even ten pounds overweight is much more of a concern than with someone who doesn't have that background." she says. A complete health history can send up red flags about "prediseases," conditions in which symptoms have not yet emerged but are likelier to, often owing to an individual's inherited risk. Since "prediabetes" and "prehypertension" are two of the biggest for fortysomethings, expect your doctor to ask for earlier and more frequent checks of your glucose levels and blood pressure, respectively, if your mom or dad has either condition. Even without a family history of diabetes, be sure to get a fasting blood-glucose test in your early forties. If gum disease is in your family tree, for example, you'll want to see a periodontist in your forties, since 50 percent of gumdisease risk is genetic, says Susan Karabin, vice president of the American Academy of Periodontology. Getting gum disease under control may also cut your risk of because bacteria in the gums can migrate to the bloodstream. Thyroid disease is also more common starting in the forties; 8 to 10 percent of women affected are between ages forty-five and fifty-four, notes Dr. Jeffrey R. Garber, chief of endocrinology at Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates, in Boston. He adds that most women with a thyroid problem have a mild version of hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid), characterized by fatigue, memory problems, depression, heavy periods and mood changes. But tests of thyroid-stimulating hormone and free T4 blood levels, he says, are very good at picking up early disease. 50s Gone forever is the idea that a woman's usefulness ends when her period does. THESE ARE definitely not your mother's fifties. Today women this age are running corporations and marathons, serving as U.S. secretary of state, working on cancer cures and managing museums, and they're not stepping down anytime soon. Menopause, on the other hand, hasn't changed a lot. The average age of onset mother's day. It is the defining event of this decade. The risk of such chronic conditions as heart disease, breast cancer, osteoporosis and dementia also begins to rise. Your inner life may become more troubled by sleeplessness or anxiety. The decisions you make now about how to adjust to this transition will have a profound effect on the second half of your life. Unfortunately, these decisions have become more complicated over the past five years as information has started to flow from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI), which was launched in 1991. It was designed to determine the effects of hormones, dietary fat, calcium and vitamin D supplements on women's health. The results have turned the conventional wisdom on its head and left many women-and health-care professionals-in a quandary. The study found no protection against stroke or benefit to a woman's heart from hormone therapy, no protection against breast and colorectal cancers or heart disease from a low-fat diet, and no help for bones and colorectal health from in some cases, hormone therapy could slightly increase the risk of breast cancer, stroke, blood clots and cognitive decline. Women and their doctors found themselves scrambling to bring their health-care decisions in line with the WHI's results. But since those first reports were released, a larger community of experts, including doctors, other researchers, public-health officials and even WHI scientists, has taken a closer look at the data and given women more definitive guidelines. You should, of course, speak with your doctor about how to approach menopausal symptoms, osteoporosis and breast and colon cancers. Meanwhile, here's what we know now. MENOPAUSAL SYMPTOMS hot flashes, night sweats, sleeplessness, vaginal dryness, feelings of sadness and anxiety: you can't overestimate the importance or the impact of these symptoms. "Some women will be driven to change their lifestyles because of the unpredictability of their moods or their sleep problems," says Dr. Christine Himes Fordyce, a geriatrician at the Group Health Cooperative, in Seattle. for some years around her fiftieth birthday. It's during this perimenopausal time, when the symptoms are intense, say many health-care professionals-and a new report from the WHI-that hormone therapy may he beneficial without causing harm to your heart. "If you are having hot flashes, bone problems or sexual difficulties, it's reasonable to use hormone therapy," says Dr. Noel Bairey Merz, a cardiologist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. "If you're looking to protect your heart, it's not. Use hormone therapy estrogen and progestin for women who still have their uteruses or estrogen alone for those who have had hysterectomies for the shortest period of time and at the lowest acceptable dose." Women who have had hysterectomies can rest a little easier: a study published in the April 12, 2006, issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded that estrogen alone does not increase the risk of breast cancer. OSTEOPOROSIS "A woman's bones begin to thin when her estrogen levels drop at menopause," medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, in New York City. "Anyone with one of these risk factors-being thin or small framed, smoking, having an overactive thyroid or a mother who had a fracture-should get her first hone-density scan as soon as she is menopausal." This is a controversial position because the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that women with a risk factor be tested at sixty and that all women be tested at sixty-five. Why would earlier testing help? Because some women naturally have thin bones, a condition called lowpeak bone mass, and if their bone density is measured at menopause, that test score can be a baseline for future measurements. If your bones don't get significantly thinner over time, you needn't worry about treatments to slow loss. "You just had thinner bones to begin with," says Siris. Until recently, it was believed that the simplest way to guarantee strong bones was to get 1,200 to 1,500 milligrams of calcium dairy) but from a supplement if necessary, and 800 to 1,000 international units of vitamin D3, most likely from a supplement (emphatically not D2, the form found in many multivitamins, because it takes about three times as much D2 to get any benefit). But in January 2006, the WHI called into question the benefits of calcium and vitamin D supplements. Still, as Siris explains, it may be because all of the women in the study-the supplement group and the control group-got adequate amounts of calcium in their diets to start with. Once a woman has consumed 1,200 to 1,500 milligrams, any more has little impact. When a bone-density test reveals osteoporosis, some good drugs, including Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva, can prevent bone loss, Siris says. But there are risks. Recent reports to the FDA described rare but serious cases of damage to the jawbone in patients taking bisphosphonates, a class of drugs that includes those used to treat bone loss. It's not clear why only by dental procedures. If you are taking a drug to treat osteoporosis or are thinking of it, alert your dentist and ask your doctorto explain the risks. Estrogen protects bones too. "If you decide to take hormones to treat the symptoms of menopause, you'll get the added benefit of protecting your skeleton," says Siris. But when you stop taking estrogen, you will begin to lose bone mass at a very rapid rate, so get a bone-density scan, and be prepared to begin the necessary medications to curtail bone loss if necessary. COLON CANCER The good news: this is the most curable of the major cancers if it's caught in time. Almost 90 percent of colon-cancer deaths could be avoided if everyone over fifty got screened, says Dr. Jerome Waye, a clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, in New York City. The bad news: only 33 percent of women in this group do so, despite there being three very good choices for screening. A fecal in the stool. It should be administered every year, beginning at age fifty. Your doctor will provide a home-test kit. You collect stool swipes from three consecutive bowel movements and place them on the supplied cards, which you return to your doctor or the laboratory. In the week before and during the period of time you're collecting specimens, you'll need to avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin and naproxen, red meat, vitamin C and citrus fruits. According to a study published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, when done annually, the FOBT reduces colon-cancer deaths by as much as 33 percent. The effectiveness of an annual FOBT can be improved if it is combined at five-year intervals with a flexible sigmoidoscopy, an examination of the rectum and the lower half of the colon. Unfortunately, recent studies suggest that because of anatomical differences, sigmoidoscopy misses significantly more polyps in women than in men. For that reason, and others, the third option, colonoscopy, is the test examines the rectum and the full length of the colon. Get a baseline examination in your early fifties. If it's normal, official recommendations are to have subsequent tests at ten-year intervals, but some doctors disagree with that advice. "The studies show that you can prevent death from colon cancer by screening every ten years," says Waye. "But death is a bad end point for clinicians. Prevention is what we should focus on, and to prevent the incidence of cancer, we should screen every five years." (If a sigmoidoscopy reveals polyps, small clumps of cells on the colon lining that can grow cancerous over time, you'll most likely have to undergo a colonoscopy to remove them, which is why many doctors recommend colonoscopy. If polyps are detected, you must have follow-up colonoscopies every three to five years.) Both the colonoscopy and the sigmoidoscopy require a thorough bowel cleansing-strong laxatives for the former, enemas for the latter-which many patients find the most unpleasant part of the kidney or heart disease. Colonoscopy requires anesthesia (usually IV sedation) and carries a 0.35 percent risk of serious complications such as bowel perforation or bleeding. Still, anyone who has a family history of colorectal cancers or polyps or a personal history of chronic inflammatory bowel disease should opt for colonoscopy. 60s You've lived with your body for all these years; you think you know every nook and cranny. But do you? KNOW THYSELF. That's the mantra for women in their sixties. Now's the time to pay attention when your body speaks to you. because the changes you feel are as important as regular screening tests. If you're worried about incontinence during a game of tennis, if your sex life is less passionate than it used to be or if you've had bouts of dizziness, don't dismiss it all as a natural part of getting older. "Most of these events could reveal something important about your health, and we have good treatments for all of them," San Francisco's Veteran's Administration Medical Center and at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF). This is not to say that you should abandon the good-health routine you've already established. The only part of your screening regimen you can think about forgoing is the Pap test. "We tell women they can stop doing cervical-cancer screenings at age sixty-five," says Seattle's Dr. Fordyce, "but only if they've had a normal Pap for three consecutive years and if they're not having new sex partners." Everything else should be continued at the same frequency as in your fifties unless your doctor recommends more frequent testing. You should also add a pneumococcal vaccine at age sixty-five; you won't need another. A DIFFERENT HEART Cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 killer of women. In the age groups beyond sixty, the rates at which men and women have heart disease converge, but the rate at which women die begins to outstrip the rate for men. Now, research into suggest why. For many women, the underlying cause of damage to the heart muscle is different, and as a result, they exhibit different symptoms. These distinctions often lead to misdiagnoses and inappropriate treatments. In a man. one large clumpy blockage in a major artery is often the culprit. In a woman, the plaque that restricts the flow of blood may be distributed throughout an artery, eventually narrowing it dangerously. The angiogram typically used to find a clot fails, and the heart problem goes undiagnosed. Or a woman's arteries may go into spasms, which often occur in smaller blood vessels rather than in major arteries, where doctors look for blockages. Either way, some important tools used to diagnose heart problems-such as the standard stress test and angiograms-are less effective in women, as arc treatments designed to bypass (surgery) or flatten (angioplasty) the large clots more common in men. Not all heart disease in women follows this pattern, of course, and many women exhibit the same the best strategy is to be diligent in screening for risk factors (high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes) and to be aware of the symptoms that distinguish women from men: shortness of breath: pain in the back, shoulders or arms; and dizziness and nausea, which can signal reduced blood flow. Should you experience symptoms you think may be a heart attack, be firm with your doctor if you believe he is examining you as he would a male patient. While angioplasty may not be your salvation, you could benefit from taking aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins or ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors to control blood pressure. GOT TA GO, GOT TA GO It's hard to miss incontinence when it arrives on the scene. You worry about leakage when you sneeze or exercise strenuously. That's stress incontinence, and it's common at two points in a woman's life-after childbirth and after menopause. Or you may feel the urge to urinate so suddenly and so powerfully that you're afraid. This condition is known as an overactive bladder, or urge incontinence, and its prevalence increases in the midforties and with every subsequent decade. "Fortunately, we have easy ways to relieve incontinence," says Dr. Cindy L. Amundsen, an associate professor in the division of urogynecology at Duke University Medical Center, in Durham. North Carolina. A 5 percent reduction in weight decreases incontinence episodes by 50 percent. Cutting your fluid intake to roughly a liter or two a day of noncaffeinated, nonalcoholic beverages also helps. And, yes, those Kegel exercises, repetitive tightening of the vaginal muscles throughout the day, do work. Several medications are available too. "They reduce urge episodes by 60 to 70 percent," Amundsen says. But they're not a complete answer. And they can have adverse interactions with other drugs, such as most medications for glaucoma. "A good solution is to use the medication to get things under control," says Amundsen, "and then work on a or cut back on the drugs." For women troubled only during vigorous exercise, simple fixes may suffice. A pessary (a diaphragm-like device inserted in the vagina) helps support the urethra. Collagen injected into the lining of the urethra, repeated at six- to eighteen-month intervals, can also reinforce the muscles that keep the canal tightly closed. For more severe cases, a midurethral sling can be surgically implanted. "The procedure takes about thirty minutes and is minimally invasive; in most patients it reduces stress-incontinent episodes by 80 to 90 percent," Amundsen says. "But you may have to have it replaced as your body changes over time." The WHI has called into question some long-standing ideas about the impact of estrogen on incontinence. According to a report on the WHI data published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, estrogen taken orally produces a higher rate of incontinence, but Amundsen and the journal's editors think that the jury is still out on the effectiveness of topical transvaginal estrogen treatment given as a cream, a suppository or a small estrogen-containing ring that remains in the vagina for three months is definitely beneficial for treating urogynecological problems," says Amundsen. MIDLIFE BLUES The USPSTF recommends that physicians test their older patients for depression. "It's an increasingly important illness in the sixty-plus age group," says Dr. Russell Harris, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina (UNC) School of Medicine at Chapel Hill, "but it frequently goes unnoticed. Depression has a huge impact on people's lives, and it shouldn't, because we have such good treatments." 70s It's payoff time. All the good habits you've followed for years will now reward you. THE FASTEST-GROWING age group of Americans is centenarians, people over 100 years old, and women make up 85 percent of them. Today's seventy-five-year-old woman can reasonably expect to live another fifteen or twenty years, and that fact changes the way we think about staying healthy. Exercise and diet demonstrate their benefits in forestalling such chronic conditions as hypertension, heart disease, cancer, osteoporosis, arthritis and even incontinence. If you have been and remain active and your weight is under control, you can begin to cut hack on or eliminate some screening tests. Regular blood-pressure checks are still crucial, but a woman at age eighty whose colon-cancer screenings have been completely clean for thirty years can probably stop getting tested. Her doctor agrees, says Mount Sinai's Dr. Waye. Decisions about health require a new level of individuality based on your health history, a benefit-risk assessment and personal preference rather than universal checklists. Whether you get a mammogram every year and how you choose to handle bone scans for osteoporosis depend on what else is going on in your life. A seventy-five-year-old woman who has serious heart disease might not want to undergo a mammogram or colorectal screening. The cancer in a woman of that age is more likely to be slow growing than in a younger woman, and her heart condition significantly other hand, a perfectly healthy seventy-five-yearold who's still very active and whose health isn't threatened by another chronic illness should continue her regular mammograms. She could live another twenty years-or more-and she's probably healthy enough to handle treatment if it's needed. For her, the risk of surgery is worth it. "In the face of uncertainty about the appropriateness of a screening test, a woman's health and her preferences have to play a role in deciding how to proceed," says UCSF's Dr. Walter. This level of individual attention is most effective when you have a regular primary-care doctor, someone you trust and with whom you have a comfortable relationship. "If I've seen a patient regularly, and she comes in with a subtle change in her behavior. I'm more likely to pick it up," UNC's Dr. Harris says. '"Can you see okay?' I'll ask.' Can you hear okay? How's your mood? 'Those are things even notice. But I would. They all contribute to a decline in quality of life and could lead to a fall and a fractured bone." Speaking of bones, advancing arthritis needn't limit your activity, even if anti-inflammatory medication isn't helping enough. Today, when the pain reaches an intolerable level, you can opt for hip-, shoulder- or knee-replacement surgery if your doctor recommends it. The technology has improved considerably in recent years, and some patients (who were diligent about physical therapy) report being back at their golf game only eight weeks after a hip replacement. Recovery from knee-replacement surgery takes about four weeks longer, depending on the patient, her age and her level of physical fitness. You and your doctor should regularly review your medications, including homeopathic remedies and vitamins. Make sure your prescription medications and vitamins are compatible, that they don't cancel each other out and that the doses are still correct. "See if you can eliminate some," Fordyce says. "of producing side effects, and the fewer medications you take, the better." The emphasis at seventy and beyond is less about screening for illness and more about staying active-physically, socially and mentally. You should be especially sensitive to any feelings of disorientation, dizziness, difficulty speaking, blurred vision or weakness of the limbs, all of which could be warning signs of a ministroke. Again, don't think of these signs as a normal part of aging. Go straight to the emergency room, or see your doctor immediately. MENTAL FITNESS "To date, there is no routine screening for Alzheimer's disease," says Dr. Eric B. Larson, director of the Group Health Cooperative's Center for Health Studies, in Seattle. It is the disease people fear most as they move through their fifties, sixties and seventies, and there is no known cure and no reliable way to prevent it. "For now, the best approach we have is to delay its onset," says Larson. but it doubles every five years after seventy so that about half of all ninety-year-olds will suffer some kind of dementia. If we can postpone the onset for even ten years, it's long enough to spare a lot of patients. Over the past decade, researchers have explored the preventive potential of estrogen, anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen. vitamin E supplements and ginkgo biloba, but their effectiveness has yet to be demonstrated. There's a strong possibility that folic acid is beneficial. But the best chances of postponing dementia are all lifestyle-based. Keep your blood pressure, weight and diabetes under control. Stay socially and intellectually active. Most important of all, exercise. Several recent studies found that physical activity can delay onset and even improve the functioning of some Alzheimer's patients. In January, the Adult Changes in Thought Study, from the Group Health Cooperative, found that walking for twenty minutes three times a week reduced the risk of developing dementia by up to 40 percent, even for those who did are very common in postmenopausal women, and most have nothing to do with an increased risk of Alzheimer's. A recent study reported that changes in the brain as early as middle age can reduce your ability to multitask. Finding it harder to read the newspaper and listen to the radio at the same time is a normal part of aging, Fordyce says. If you're worried, ask your doctor about it. She will recommend a speech therapist or an occupational therapist who can administer a test. (Don't try to find a test on your own. Anything marketed on the Internet is of questionable value.) "It can take as little as half an hour," Fordyce says. Time well spent to ease your mind. Sidebar Her Thirties: Without Trepidation INES SASTRE, Model, Actress "When you are twenty, you have a certain fear of the unknown," says the Spanish beauty INES SASTRE, who has appeared on the cover of Town &; Country as a sixteen-year-old ingenue This time around, she's happy to report that whatever apprehension she once had about her future has subsided, clearing the way for several life-changing events. Chief among the exciting developments is her marriage this past April to longtime friend Alessandro Corrias, who works in the Italian media industry; they are expecting their first child this fall. This year also marks her first big role in an American film, The Lost City. "The most beautiful things happen to you when you least expect them," says the London-based newlywed, who walks and swims to stay in shape and who recently celebrated her tenth anniversary as the face of Lancme. So what might she be up to the next time she appears on our cover? Sastre defers to Eleanor Roosevelt: "Yesterday is history. Tomorrow is mystery. Today is a gift." Her Forties: All Fun, No Fuss JULIE SKARRATT, Photographer "I don't have fifty minutes a day to put on makeup and do my hair," says out of the house in five minutes, twenty-three seconds. "This is a surprising statement coming from a former Ford model, even one who nine years ago traded her career in front of the camera lens for a career behind it. Yet with or without makeup, the forty-five-year-old stunner, who moved to the United States from Sydney, Australia, in 1983, is perennially radiant. Perhaps that's because she's so thrilled with where she is at this point in her life. "I'm in my prime," Skarratt says. Her thriving career as a photographer takes her around the globe, from shooting a high-profile wedding for Town &; Country in St. Bart's to covering parties in the south of France. And when she travels for pleasure, she indulges her athletic side, surfing in Costa Rica and skiing in Austria. These days, her constant activity enables her to keep off unwanted weight without being overzealous about her diet. "When I was a model, I used to starve in moderation." Sidebar Her Fifties: Scaling New Heights STEPHANIE FRENCH, Businesswoman, Philanthropist "I love trying different things," says STEPHANIE FRENCH, a senior vice president at U.S. Trust in New York. In 1997 one of those "things" was climbing Mount Kilimanjaro. This mother of a twenty-two-year-old daughter and a twelve-year-old son enjoyed the experience so much that she bested the achievement shortly thereafter with a trek up Mount Everest. The resourcefulness that helped her climb 18,500 feet above sea level (just above base camp) was formed during her childhood, in Darien, Connecticut. French's mother, who at ninety is still a "Marilyn Monroe blonde," emphasized the importance of cultivating one's beauty and feminine charms. Her father, a consultant to the chairman of the board at American Express, taught her that she was responsible for developing her God-given talents and using them in a way that would help others. After earning an M.B.A. from Harvard Business School- "because I never wanted to," explains French-she put both parents' wisdom to use, assuming prominent jobs in the worlds of corporate and private philanthropy. French, who resides in Manhattan, maintains that being in her midfifties has taught her that the older she gets, the better life gets. "For one thing, I now have a much greater sense of who I am." Her Sixties: Still in High Gear ADRIANA MNUCHIN, Entrepreneur "If you had to say one thing about me, it would probably be that I always walk fast," says ADRIANA MNUCHIN, who operates the Mayflower Inn &; Spa, in Washington, Connecticut, with her husband, Robert, an art dealer and a former partner at Goldman Sachs, along with their daughter Lisa Medley. In fact, lethargy has never been an option for the Memphis-born Mnuchin, who despite having had five children has maintained the same weight since she was in her twenties. ("Though the weight has shifted," she admits.) Now well boxes, plays tennis, does Pilates and takes power walks. "I like the energy it gives me, particularly as I get older," she says of her rigorous regime. She is more convinced than ever that her contemporaries "need to continue to engage themselves in active pursuits. It gives us a sense of vitality." Mnuchin sees the 20,000-square-foot destination spa at the Mayflower, where the focus is on fitness, as a place for other women to get on the right path. "If you set goals," says this disciplined go-getter, "you tend to meet them." Sidebar Her Seventies: It's How You Feel DIAHANN CARROLL, Actress, Singer "I'll be seventy-one this month," says DIAHANN CARROLL, as if she can't quite believe it. Indeed, if it weren't for the length of her tenure in the public eye, during which she has entertained film and television audiences for more than fifty years-most famously as the scheming Dominique Deveraux on Dynasty-we her most recent, to singer Vic Damone, ended in divorce in 1996), one child (journalist and screenwriter Suzanne Kay) and now two grandchildren, Carroll could by all rights settle into a comfy rocking chair at her home in Beverly Hills. Instead, she's doing a cabaret tour ("The Life and Times of Diahann Carroll"), which enjoyed a successful two-week run at Feinstein's New York, at the Regency Hotel. "Retirement is a dangerous, incorrect concept," she says, "because you are still a-li-ve." In addition to working out with a personal trainer, Carroll-a breast-cancer survivor-watches her diet, eats lots of fruits and vegetables and makes sure to see her doctors regularly. "Dwelling on aging is the sickest thing we can do," she says with conviction. "Besides, seventy is not what it used to be." In Carroll's case, at least, seventy may just be the new forty. For fashion information, see page What you should, and shouldn't, do when faced with the environmentally illiterate. // Dog poop. Pop cans. Trampled vegetation. Sometimes, especially when you stroll down a well-used trail, there are constant reminders that some people just don't get it. But what if the offending act happens right in front of you? Say you spot a hiker gathering fistfuls of wildflowers, or cutting across switchbacks, or washing dishes in the lake. What's a conscientious hiker like yourself to do? I ask this because outdoor etiquette has been on my mind of late. Despite my constant attention to the low-impact ethic. and my disgust for those who litter and befoul the wilderness, I was recently caught with my elbows on the table, so to speak. It's an aberration on an otherwise clean rap sheet, but I confess: I let a friend's kid feed a carrot to a deer. A few seconds later, a hiker who'd witnessed the "crime" pounced on me like a cop after a speeding sports car. presentation was all wrong. Instead of merely making me feel guilty about my actions, he launched into an agitated, finger-pointing, high-decibel condescension. Naturally, my first reaction was to become extremely defensive, and my second reaction was to consider slugging the guy. It was not a pretty scene. Later, after calming down and reflecting on the whole ugly incident, I wondered how I would have handled the situation if the hiking boot were on the other foot. Of the two choices you're faced withspeaking up or shutting up-both have drawbacks. The first involves friction and the second, betrayal of principles. Outdoor experts acknowledge that this is tricky territory. In fact, everyone contacted for this article hesitated to encourage laypeople to take matters into their own hands. "There is no single right answer," says Rich Brame, outreach and training manager for the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS) based in Lander, Wyoming. "Each situation is a. matter of education versus self-preservation." Mark Forbes Northwest Region, agrees. "Hikers should ask themselves if it's really worth the confrontation." Even seasoned wilderness officials are warned to use their best judgment when approaching wayward backcountry users. Dispensing advice while wearing a uniform is one thing, Brame says, but correcting fellow hikers in the backcountry is another. Someone who's your peer is more than likely to think, "Who the heck are you to tell me what to do?" If the other party's misdeed has really riled your environmental conscience, as was the case for my fellow woodsman in the deer feeding episode, it's easy to come off sounding like a pompous jerk. That's when tempers can flare. For instance: In Montana's Glacier National Park, hiker Steve Payne of Olympia, Washington, approached a couple who stood by while their son chased a young mountain goat. He suggested that since they were not in a petting zoo, the parents should control their child. "They were taken aback and told back at the time," Payne reports. In Ocala National Forest, Florida, BACKPACKER Senior Editor Michele Morris was appalled when another boater asked those in her canoe to throw sandwiches overboard so some otters would stay in view. "I shot back that it's irresponsible to feed wildlife," she says. The other boaters went silent, "but my canoe mates glared at me for being so rude." // Most backcountry bumblers can be reformed with a little tact and understanding. // The key issue, says Forbes, should always be, "Did you educate or alienate?" Education works best in an atmosphere of respect and cooperation. Alienation occurs when people are being lectured to and feel they must defend themselves. A better approach, according to George Wallace, associate professor of natural resources, recreation, and tourism at Colorado State University, is to rely on the "authority of the resource." This technique, often employed by wilderness officials, deemphasizes regulations and focuses instead on a relaxed, respectful atmosphere by engaging in friendly chitchat before outlining "the changes that can be set in motion by a series of seemingly innocent acts," says Wallace, who wrote a chapter about this subject for The Wilderness Ranger Training Module. So the hiker I encountered should have ambled up to me and commented on the weather. Then, keeping it low key, he might have said, "These guys sure are cute, aren't they? It's tempting to feed' em, but the problem is that then they get used to people. The next thing you know, they're in the parking lots looking for food from people, drinking from puddles of antifreeze ...." Or something to that effect. Wallace says most wilderness users are concerned about their role in the outdoors, and usually change their behavior once they "understand how their actions affect the way nature operates." Here are a few more points to remember: Everybody makes mistakes, so assume the best about others. Be aware of body language and tone of voice, both yours and theirs. Speak softly and respectfully and try to stand shoulder-to-shoulder rather than faceto-face. If approaching a group, pick out one person to chat with because it's easier than dealing with a whole crew. Speak on behalf of "the resource," rather than blaming. Mention the recommendations of the land management agency or wilderness advocates. A hiker who ignores the "Please stay off fragile meadows" sign is likely to obey it in the future if you casually say, "You might want to go a different way, because the park ranger told us the meadows are having a hard time recovering." On the other hand, "Hey, stay on the trail!" will only elicit a defensive response and comments about "those #! % &*; tree huggers." Back off if a situation becomes confrontational. If you're unfortunate enough to bump into people who use the outdoors for illegal activities, revert to "and don't get involved. Get a physical description of the offenders, as well as the time and location of the incident, and report it to the appropriate land management agency. In the end, the most important thing you can do is lead by example. Pass along wilderness ethics by first influencing those within your own group. If everyone is humming the Leave No Trace tune, neighbors will surely begin to hear and do likewise. Author Affiliation Chastened but wiser, Kyle Morrison is now leading by example on the trails near Seattle, Washington. //
Rub on a preventive "shield" and poison ivy won't get under your skin. // Finally, a sure-fire way to avoid getting poison ivy. Think about it: No more rash, no more oozing blisters, no more itch that can turn even the most placid and subdued person into a crazed, teeth-gnashing fiend who'll sell soul and future for a few moments relief And it was right under your nose all the time: Move to Antarctica. There you go. Of course, you may he allergic to penguins but life's not perfect. If it was, there would be none of this dreaded plant life lurking along trails, just waiting for a hapless hiker to wander by, brush against the leaves, then spend the next week or two scratching like a flea-infested hound. And despite the legions of backwoods lovers whose mantra is "Leaves of three, let it be," many still somehow manage to encounter poison ivy and are forced to try and cope with its dreadful side effects. There's a light at the end has been hard at work developing ways to keep the itch at bay. Prevention, after all, is far better than trying to claw the skin off your bones. THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM The poisonous weeds in question grow in all Lower 48 states (Alaska and Hawaii are safe), and take the form of either a small shrub or a woody, ivy-like vine. East of the Rocky Mountains you'll find poison it, in the West it's poison oak, and in wet areas of the Southeast poison sumac. The name isn't as important as what's lurking in and on all three: urushiol, a usually colorless (sometimes light yellow) oil that's quite potent. Two to 2.5 millionths of a gram can trigger a reaction in highly sensitive people, which is about 50 percent of adults in the United States. Another 35 percent react to larger concentrations of urushiol. Sensitivity to the oil is the single most common cause of allergic skin reaction in the United States, to outdoor injuries. When urushiol soaks into human skin an allergic reaction takes place. Not everyone reacts the same, but most people first develop redness where they contacted the oil, usually in the form of streaks where the plant brushed against the skin. It takes varying amounts of time for the reaction to show up. On thickskin areas of your body, such as palms and the bottoms of feet, the oil soaks in more slowly than on thin-skin areas like arms and legs. If you're highly sensitive, you'll see the dreadful signs in 2 to 6 hours. Those who are less sensitive may not show symptoms for days, or in some cases, for up to two weeks. For most people, though, 12 to 48 hours is all it takes to know whether the next 10 to 14 days will be cursed (and have you cursing). Adding insult to injury is the fact that places on your body previously affected by the rash can fire up once again, even. There may be some swelling. Blisters eventually erupt and discharge fluid, which crusts over in the final stage of this very unpleasant chain of events. And as for the Big Question: No, the blister fluid doesn't cause the rash to spread. What usually happens is the urushiol gets on your hands, you touch yourself, and that's how the rash shows up in all those odd places that never see daylight, much less come in contact with plants. The best plan of attack is avoidance, but with urushiol, it's what you can't see that can drive you mad For instance, even if you're wearing long pants and sleeves you can get a rash on your body because the oil can get on your clothing and boots. You get home, remove your footwear, the oil gets on your hands and voila! (Urushiol stays active for years, by the way.) Then there's the sad tale of a savvy fellow I know who can spot poison a recent hike he stopped for a rest break, surveyed the area for dangerous plants, and saw none. He confidently rested against a tree the wind recently toppled. Three days later, when the backs of his legs were aflame with the rash and massive blisters, he realized that once upon a time, poison ivy vines had thrived on the tree's bark, leaving behind-you guessed it-lots of urushiol. The moral: Avoidance is a fine idea but if you're highly sensitive, you can't take chances. You need to lower your risk factor, and here's where science comes in. For years researchers have been trying to develop a "barrier" cream that when applied to skin, will block or at least hinder absorption of the irritating substance. No luck, until 1995 when the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology (Volume 33, Number 2) reported on a successful barrier cream study. A lotion made of an organic clay mixture was smeared on one forearm of 211 healthy poison ivy. One hour later urushiol patches were taped to both forearms and left in place for four hours. After the patches were removed, both arms were washed with liquid detergent and water. The results: 68 percent who had reactions on unprotected forearms suffered no reaction on protected arms. Those who did have a reaction on their lotioned forearms had significantly less irritation compared to the unprotected arm. In 1996 the proven formula, dubbed IvyBlock Lotion, was introduced to the market. For almost two years it was the only barrier-type agent available that had the U.S. Food and Drug Administration seal of approval. This past spring a new FDA-sanctioned player called Work Shield emerged. Being the curious type, I got samples of both, and here's what I learned. IvyBlock: The instructions say to apply to the skin 15 minutes before treading where poisonous plants live. I coated one arm with the stuff, and found it to be virtually invisible with a mild but not unpleasant odor. Since it's supposed surprised that my treated arm remained slightly creamy to the touch. The manufacturer recommends reapplication every 4 hours during times of exposure. If you sweat heavily, you should be okay because there's a bonding agent that's supposed to help the lotion stay put. Wash off with soap and water after the danger has passed. A 4ounce bottle costs around $12 and can be purchased at most drug stores or larger supermarkets. Contact EnviroDerm Pharmaceuticals, Inc., P.O. Box 323 70, Louisville, KY 40232-2370; (502) 634-7700. Reader serc, ice #106. Note: In May Avon Skin-So-Soft IvyBlock Lotion was unveiled. According to an Avon spokesperson, it's simply IvyBlock marketed through the SkinSo-Soft line of products. The reason: to reach more families. "Price is the same. Available directly from Avon (800-367-2866 or http: //www.avon. com), or through a sales representative in your neighborhood. Work Shield: The manufacturer says one application will provide about 8 hours of protection. Work Shield quickly slightly creamy film. As a bonus, it's FDA-registered not only as a barrier cream, but also as a treatment to help stop the itch and dry up weeping blisters. Like IvyBlock, it should be washed off after the threat has passed. A 4-ounce bottle costs around $12. Contact: Dermaron Corp., P.O. Box 3012, Peabody, MIA 01961; (888) 4896625. Reader service #107. Now for the question I know you're dying to ask: Will they prevent the torturous itch? To find out I stripped naked, smeared myself with each, vigorously rolled in poison oak for 20 minutes, then... just kidding. Actually, my curiosity only goes so far. But since both are FDA approved, that means the feds are satisfied that each stands up to the stated claims. NIP IT IN THE BUD Besides using a barrier cream, there are other lines of defense in the itch wars. Of prime importance is washing as soon as you realize you've touched a since even the extremely sensitive have 5 to 10 minutes before urushiol soaks in enough to cause trouble. Those of lesser sensitivity may have up to 2 hours. Use cold water and lots of it; avoid hot water because it softens and spreads the oil, and opens skin pores. As for soap, no need to use it if you act within the first 3 minutes of contact. Many dermatologists, however, do recommend washing with some type of cleansing agent or detergent if more than a few minutes have passed. If you're highly sensitive, repeated washings aren't a bad idea. Organic solvents like alcohol and gasoline, while usually not readily available in the wilderness, work even better than soap and water. Lacking those, you can use stove fuel. Repeatedly dab the exposed area with pieces of solvent-soaked cotton, then rub with fresh solvent-soaked cotton. Don't leave the gasoline on your skin but for a few seconds, and avoid using the same piece of cotton for more than a. The National Safety Council, being a cautious bunch, says you should conclude by washing five to six times with soap and water, then rinse with rubbing alcohol, followed by clear water. You may notice commercial products on drug store and outfitter shelves that claim to wash off urushiol, and often, the accompanying itch. Before buying, check the label and see if the product is FDA approved. If not, you decide whether it's worth the gamble. Most are little more than a soap-based liquid anyway, and some even tell you to scrub the rash with their product. I've never done this, but I talked to a few folks who have and they told me the obvious: rub and scrub itchy skin and it'll itch even more. Be sure to clean under fingernails where urushiol may lurk. You can also pick up the oil from your clothing, the bottom of your tent, your hiking staff, even the hair of your dog or cat. If you've clothes and gear a good washing once at home. RASH RELIEF Sometimes, despite your best preventive measures, you learn about a poisonous plant encounter after it's too late. Although nothing will cure the rash, you can try to relieve the itch. First a note about what probably won't work. Avoid topical lotions, creams, or sprays that contain antihistamines or anesthetics, since the additives have a tendency to make things worse. Most topical corticosteroids sold over the counter are too weak to do much good. Aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (such as ibuprofen), and oral antihistamines have little or no effect, although an antihistamine might help you sleep. Your physician can prescribe a strong topical steroid that may help if you start using it before the rash turns into blisters. As for homeopathic treatments, there are over 100 different folk remedies involving substances provided by Mother Nature, but all are scientifically unproven and most seem to have little effect. There are two plants, however, that many, has leaves that release a pale green sap when crushed. When dabbed on the rash, the sap reportedly stops the itch for 24 to 48 hours. Jewelweed has as many supporters as plantain. The sap from crushed plants can be applied to the rash, and some claim relief after soaking in bath water mixed with the juice of approximately one pound of plants. Other home treatment options I've heard folks swear by: * Topical applications of plain old calamine lotion. * Soaking in a tepid bath with one cup Aveeno brand oatmeal or two cups of linnet starch added. * A cold, wet compress placed on the rash area. Some sufferers get relief by standing in a hot shower for several minutes, then gently patting the water off the itchy areas. If a close encounter with urushiol causes you to feel ill, there's significant swelling, or the rash is in a particularly sensitive area, forgo any attempts at self treatment and high-tail it to a doctor for medical attention. Author the Backcountry (Globe Pequot Press 800-243-0495) and director of the Wilderness Medicine Institute located in Pitkin, Colorado. //
Bargain-Hunter's Special In this world of increasingly high-tech -- and expensive-stoves, there remains a bargain-basement burner that works well and will set you back just $30: the Camping Gaz Twister HPZ. This sturdy stove took top honors in our August 2000 canister stove review. Fast And Light What do you say about a stove like the $64 Snow Peak GigaPower, Auto ("Editors' Choice' 99." April 1999) that cranks out heat. simmers like a champ, is indestructible, yet weighs just 3 ounces and could hide in your fist? "I want one." Built To Last Optimus Svea owners use it for decades, then bequeath it to their heirs. Embracing the dictum "if it ain't broke, don't fix it," the venerable Svea ($70) will last a lifetime, or two. Winter Warrior We would no sooner head into the backcountry in winter without a Mountain Safety Research XGK Expedition ($110) than without a super-warm sleeping bag. Not only does it burn virtually any liquid fuel, it fires If It Ain't Broke "(Mav 1998) for more details. All-Conditions Champ The X series stoves from Coleman Exponent (formerly Peak 1) - the Xtreme, Xpert, and two-burner Xpedition ($60 to $90) -overcome the classic bugaboos of canister stovE they burn well in freezing temps and windy conditions-an incredible marriage of versatility and simplicity ("Editors' Choice' 97," April 1997). Plus, the canisters are recyclable. Any Fuel, Anywhere Canister fuels are convenient in warm weather, white gas performs in strong winds and cold, and multiple-fuel stoves are ideal for adventuring overseas. The Primus Multi-Fuel ("The Chosen Few," April 1998) was the first to burn them all ($99). FUEL The first step in narrowing your choice of stoves is deciding on fuel type. Canisters contain a pressurized blend of fuels like propane, butane, isobutane, and isopropane that is released as a gas. Canister stoves are much simpler and quieter than liquid-fuel stoves, have precise flame a fraction of the bulk and weight of a liquid-fuel burner. Negatives include a severely diminished flame in freezing temps and strong winds, and a decrease in flame intensity as the canister empties. It uses more expensive fuel, few canisters are recyclable, and none, at this writing, are refillable. Most liquid-fuel stoves link via a fuel line to a refillable fuel bottle that must be pumped to pressurize the fuel for use. Most also require priming, or preheating. Liquid-fuel stoves demand varying degrees of assembly and periodic maintenance. While they are bulkier, heavier, and less convenient than canister stoves, they stand up better to strong winds and cold weather. Models that burn multiple fuels, like white gas, kerosene, and auto gas, are valuable when traveling overseas. Liquid fuel is lighter than canisters for long trips with infrequent opportunities to refuel, and it offers you the flexibility of packing the amount you need in fuel bottles of various sizes. The stoves listed in the charts and reviews use are times when the ability to take apart and fix a malfunctioning stove in the field is more valuable than any other trait. Now with a self-cleaning shaker jet, the Mountain Safety Research WhisperLite ($60) continues to raise the bar, though given the stove's proven durability, you may wait a long, long time before you experience how easy it is to disassemble. Super Simmerer Years ago, when liquid-fuel stoves had just two settings-fla meth rower and off-the Coleman Exponent (formerly Peak 1) Apex II became the first of its kind to offer precise flame control. It still simmers as well as any competitor, and at a very reasonable price ($65). Auto gas (AG). Use this for a multifuel stove only when cleaner, more refined fuels like white gas or kerosene are unavailable. Choose the lowest-octane unleaded available. Alcohol (AL). Denatured alcohol is a clean, relatively safe fuel, but it doesn't burn nearly as hot as canisters or other liquid fuels. and burn (and carry) more fuel. Blended-fuel canisters (BF). These contain a blend of propane and butane, with isobutane or isopropane sometimes added to maintain a steadier heat output until the canister is fully emptied. Butane canisters (BU). Butane alone, without some propane, burns cooler and produces a smaller flame below 450F, limiting its usefulness in the backcountry. Isobutane (IB). Although it doesn't burn as hot as blended fuels, isobutane burns steady to the last drop, tapering less than butane and blended fuels. Isopropane (IP). Isopropane is hotter and burns better at low temperatures than isobutane; it shares the latter's advantage of maintaining heat output until the canister empties. Kerosene (KE). It's cheap, available around the globe, and burns hot. But kerosene produces dark smoke and fumes, blackens cookware, and clogs stoves quicker than a clean petrol like white gas. Whenever possible, choose "K-1" over diesel kerosene. White heat per pound and is the dear choice for long trips in North Americathe only place it's readily available, often under the Coleman label. White-gas stoves can flare up when fed too much gas while preheating (priming) the burner, so be careful, especially around flammable objects like a tent. Wood/solid fuel (WO). A woodburning stove relieves you of the weight of fuel, a plus on long trips where dry, small wood is readily available and can be legally gathered. But wood-burning stoves don't burn as hot as liquid-fuel or canister stoves, and wet wood exacerbates that problem. BOILING TIME This number is provided by the manufacturer and represents the amount of time that elapses from the moment the flame hits the pot until 1 quart of roomtemperature water reaches a full boil at sea level. For multifuel stoves, we requested the boiling time when using white gas. For those stoves that burn a variety of canister fuels, we let the manufacturer choose which to burn. Factors besides fuel, greatly affect performance. BURN TIME Also provided by the manufacturer, these two numbers represent the length of time it takes to consume the designated amount of fuel when running full throttle under optimum conditions. For instance, 90/7.8 means the stove will empty a 7.8ounce canister of fiel in 90 minutes. This measure gives an idea of how much fuel you'll need on a given trip. FEATURES Double burner (DB). The Coleman Exponent (formerly Peak 1) Xpedition sports two burners that run off a single canister, while the VauDe/Markill Big Shot has two burners that run off of two canisters. Both models let you cook two pots of food simultaneously, with independent flame control. Fuel bottle included (FB). Some stoves come with a fuel bottle included in the purchase price. Hard-shell case (HC). Some stoves come in a protective plastic carrying case. Push-button ignition (PB). Also known as "piezo ignition," this feature fights the stove with the push of a price of a stove (and the weight, slightly) in exchange for enhanced convenience, but don't leave the matches at home: We've found piezo autolighters on many stoves to work erratically. Repair kit (RK). The stove comes with specialized tools and spare parts for routine field maintenance and repair. Stuff sack (SS). A nylon sack is included to protect the contents of your pack from the stove's sharp edges. Windscreen (WS). Some are standalone, wrap-around aluminum windscreens that actually keep wind from affecting your stove's heat transfer, while others are little more than bands of metal encircling the burner. WEIGHT Provided by the manufacturer, the weight for all stoves includes the burner unit only, unless it is permanently attached to the fuel tank. Fast And Lj &t; With its egg-carton texture and accordion fold, the Cascade Designs Therm-a-Rest Z-Rest ($32) looks a bit unorthodox, but the molded foam pad offers a terrific combination of low weight, fast deployment,, "April 1995). Several of our editors swear by the threequarter-length version as a backup winter pad. Built To Last Despite years of hard traveling, we've failed to put a dent in Crazy Creek's PowerLounger ($51), which sports a nylon cover protecting virtually indestructible sheets of closed-cell foam. This 54-inch mat also features stays and straps for quick conversion to a comfy chair. Winter Warrior One editor has spent a dozen winter nights -- including two above the Arctic Circle -- sleeping soundly atop Slumberjack's AirLite Composite self-inflating pad ($89). Almost 2 inches thick, it features a layer of closed-cell foam beneath an open-cell layer; the combination provides insulation that'll make you forget the snow below. A slipresistant surface limits slip-sliding during the night. (Watch for an upcoming review.) Comfort King With more than 2 inches of air-inflated foam cushion, not even a temperamental princess will feel a pea under a Cascade Designs Therm-a-Rest Camp Rest pad ($82). Our bigguy testers also feet and elbows off the cold ground, though all this comfort weighs more than 4 pounds. Best Lounge Act Mountain Hardwear's Back Country 60 Camp Chair ($80) is a veritable backwoods La-Z-Boy that's also a 60-inch sleeping pad. The chair provides the utmost in comfort when kicking back around camp and features a high back so you can recline with your head and neck fully supported. There are removable aluminum stays for dependable support and easy packing. (Watch for an upcoming review.) No-Slip Sleeper For dream-time gymnasts-those folks who toss and turn all night long-the grippy-as-arock-shoe cover on Appalachian Mountain Supply/Artiach's Skin-Mat ($72 for the regular long) will keep your bag from sliding around during noc nal contortions. Testers also raved about the SkinMat's tiny dime sions when rolled tight ("Sleeping Beauties," October 1996). TYPE Closed-cell foam (CF). This is the pad material for hikers who chronically abuse gear. Millions of tiny air bubbles locked in the foam prevent intrusion by water, nearly impervious to tent stakes, stove sparks, and careless dragging around camp. Crampons and canine teeth, however, are another matter. The downside is that closed-cell foam can't be compressed since the air can't be sqeezed out, so these pads get quite bulky. The most common compromise is to go with a thin mat, providing good insulation but little cushioning. Open-cell foam (OF). Thick and cushy like a big sponge slab, open-cell foam conforms to your curves for a great night's rest. These pads tend to be inexpensive, but they soak up water (unless encased in a waterproof cover) and can be bulky when rolled up. Closed-cell foam/opwn-cell foam hybrid (CF/OF). By bonding a layer of closed-cell foam to a swath of open-cell foam, companies create a durable insulation base with a cushy top panel for comfort. A water- and tear-resistant cover generally encases the pad. Self-inflating pad (SI). Put a slab of open-cell foam iside an airtight cover,. When packing for travel, open the air valve and roll up the pad, compressing the foam and squeezing the air out through the valve; close the valve so it doesn't reinflate. When you get into camp, open the valve and let the pad unroll and suck in air. Customize the firmness of the pad with a few puffs of air, twist the valve shut, and you have a comfy, cozy, waterresistant bed. Punctures are problematic, though most can be repaired (see March 1999, p. 168, for repair instructions). Other materials (OM). One pad maker, Stephenson's Warmlite, has forsaken foam and opted instead to fill mattresses with down. FEATURES Chair conversion (CC). Webbing straps and buckles bend these pads into comfy camp chairs. Conversion kits and sleeves are also available to retrofit many nonconverting pads. Integral compression or roll straps (CS). These built-in straps keep the pad tightly rolled and compressed, and can be used to (MC). Get firm support under your spine, soft support under your pelvis, and medium support for your neck and head. Multiple chambers allow you to adjust the cushioning in different parts of the pad for a customized feel. In addition, a puncture flattens only part of the pad rather than the whole thing. Drawbacks include higher prices and greater weight, thanks to additional material in the chamber walls. Molded surfaces (MS). Many closedcell foam pads have molded ridges or bums. The ridges trap air between the Dad and the ground and between you and the pad, creating more cushion and insulation with the same amount of foam. The textured foam also makes the pad less slippery. Mummy shaped (MU). Tapered like a mummy sleeping bag, these pads use less material so they weigh less. Anyone who turns and tosses during the night might find the pads too narrow. No-slip surface (NS). Textured or rubberized materials help keep slick sleeping bags from sliding off pads feature a thicker chamber at the head; some pads sport a pocket for stashing a jacket or spare set of clothes for use as a pillow. Repair kit (RK). Many pads come with a repair kit including glue and patches. If your pad didn't come with one, buy a repair kit before heading out. Stuff sack (SS). Many pads come with stuff sacks to protect them from damage when lashed outside a pack. Sidebar
WHERE FISH GO IN WINTER AND SOLUTIONS TO 7 OTHER NATURAL MYSTERIES // Backpackers are notorious for venturing into the wilderness to contemplate life's most perplexing questions. Should I marry that guy? Should I quit my job and hike the Pacific Crest Trail? Sorry, we can't help with those (though we've never met a regretful thru-hiker). But toss us a few riddles about the outdoors, like why spiders don't stick to their own webs, and we have you covered. Herewith, answers to eight of nature's wildest mysteries. Q: Why don't spiders stick to their own webs? Turns out Spider-Man's story isn't all fiction. When the comic-book legend clings to buildings with his hooklike fingers, he's actually mimicking the technique of his namesake. At the end of each leg, a spider has a toe with three or four tiny claws. While naive insects stumble onto the web feet-first, entangling themselves in the gluelike threads, spiders hook on and navigate with ease. "They hang onto their webs instead of arachnid specialist at the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum in Tucson." And they very rarely crawl onto another spider's web. They know it's the home of a predator." Q: Does moss always grow on the north side of trees? The short answer: Moss grows anywhere it can, so don't throw out your compass just yet. The long answer: Moss and lichens require more moisture than many other forest plants, so they can help with navigation. In locations that forest ecologists call "pivotal thresholds" -places that get some, but not abundant, precipitation-moss grows only on the north side of trees, where moisture lingers. "It occurs most often in North America in temperate zones," explains John Bailey, Ph.D., of Northern Arizona University's School of Forestry. That doesn't include perpetually moist environments like the Pacific Northwest, where moss and lichens grow on all sides of trees, or the desert Southwest, where scarce moisture leads to unpredictable, if any, growth patterns freeze? The cold truth is that winter has far less of an impact on creatures that live below the water's surface than on those that live above it. According to Tom Doolittle, a fish and wildlife biologist on Lake Superior, bodies of water "turn over" in winter so that the warmer water is at the bottom instead of the top. "When a lake surface is frozen, the fish generally seek a strata just above the bottom that offers the best level of oxygen and temperature for their species," he says. Fish biologists in Alaska report that even in tarns as shallow as 10 feet, fish often find the oxygen to survive. But Doolittle adds that things can get grim if a lake freezes and is then covered with so much snow that light can't get through to sustain the oxygen-providing plants on the lake bottom. Fortunately, a complete winter kill isn't a catastrophe. Doolittle says lakes can be repopulated in warmer months by birds flying overhead and dropping fish eggs elevation of treeline? Air temperature, says Dr. Bailey. "Most treeline species have evolved to survive well below freezing," he explains. But extreme cold (below 0degreesF) causes cell damage that stunts or stops growth. Which explains why treeline is much lower at high elevations and at polar latitudes, where the angle of the sun is too slight to provide temperatures necessary for supporting life. In Greenland, for instance, treeline is at sea level. The highest treeline is found near the equator, in the mountains of Ecuador and Peru around 13,000 feet. In North America, the highest is 11,000 feet on Arizona's San Francisco Peaks. Wind is a secondary factor in determining treeline. The sheer force of hurricane-strength gusts makes it hard for young buds and branches to hang on. "At treeline," notes Dr. Bailey, "you find the most wind-resistant species, like white bark and bristlecone pine. They're hunkered down trying to survive without cover." Q: What's the very little difference, but don't tell that to the princess who's all puckered up. A toad is actually a kind of frog, the classification given to all amphibious life forms that hop as adults and don't have a tail. Craig Ivanyi, a herpetologist at the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum in Tucson, says the one distinguishing characteristic is the toad's paratoid glands. Located behind their eyes, these raised, kidney-bean-shaped glands produce and store defensive toxins. Various species of frogs secrete defensive toxins from their skin, but only toads pack them in paratoid glands. "It's true some toads spend more time on land, but so do some species of frogs, so you can't use that to separate them," explains Ivanyi. And the legend about toads giving you warts? That's pure fairy tale. Q: Is heat lightning dangerous? This may come as a shock, but there's no such thing as "heat lightning." Meteorologist Jeff Renner, author of Lightning Strikesn't create lightning-only storms do. "When you see a flash in the sky and it's a hot day, there's a thunderstorm out there." Q: Why do birds sing in the morning? Unlike humans who need coffee to spring into action, birds are motivated by sunlight. "Some species require very little light and start singing in the wee hours of the morning," explains Martha Fischer, a sound archivist at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology in Ithaca, NY. "Others start singing at a more reasonable hour." As the morning progresses and the air temperature rises, Fischer says, birds tend to sing less frequently or stop altogether. They then turn their attention to hunting, nest building, and mating. There are exceptions, of course-mockingbirds sing at full tilt in the dead of night, while red-eyed vireos sing all day long. Q: How does wind blow in different directions at the same time? This is a two-part answer. 1) It doesn't can travel in only one direction at a time. 2) It does. That same stream of air can bounce around like a ping-pong ball, ricocheting off the ground, canyon walls, and other natural barriers, its head going in a different direction than its tail, according to Renner.
MAMMOTH TREES, GOLDEN PEAKS, AND BREATHTAKING SOLITUDE HIGHLIGHT 6 NEW HIKES IN CALIFORNIA'S HIGH SIERRA. // BACKPACKER READERS RECENTLY VOTED California's Sierra Nevada one of America's top three mountain ranges, and John Muir's ghost isn't arguing. The father of environmentalism once described the Range of Light as "the most divinely beautiful of all the mountain chains I have ever seen." Here, soaring cliffs, crystalline streams, flower-choked meadows, and cathedral-like groves of old-growth sequoia create some of the most inspiring wilderness backpacking in the world. The best slice of the High Sierra arguably lies within Sequoia and Kings Canyon. These adjoining parks protect an array of forested gorges, blue rivers, and sawtoothed ridgelines-plus 14,491-foot Mt. Whitney, the Lower 48's highest peak. Three national forests buffer them, guaranteeing solitude for anyone willing to walk a few miles. You'll find traffic on the Pacific Crest and John Muir Trails, but throw in some cross-country travel and an untrailed pass or two, and the escapes are endless. As proof, we offer, and GPS-enabled. HIKES BY STEVE HOWE 1 Wallace Col Ramble Explore a high-country granite paradise. None of the usual adjectives does justice to this 32-mile, 4- to 6-day circuit through Dusy Basin, LeConte Canyon, Evolution Basin, and the Middle Fork of Bishop Creek. So we won't lay a single "stunning" or "jaw-dropping" on you. But we will say that this trip is best done slowly, to take advantage of numerous 5-star fishing lakes, sidehikes, and campsites. The adventure starts with a stout 2,000-foot climb over Bishop Pass to excellent LNT camping on granite benches in Dusy Basin. On day 2, descend steeply to LeConte Canyon and the John Muir Trail (JMT), and climb far up to Muir Pass, with its magnificent stone hut (it's an emergency shelter). Beyond lies broad Evolution Basin, named in 1895 by its first backpackers, Theodore Solomons and Leigh Bierce. (While still in his teens, Solomons championed what would later become the JMT ascend eastward past scenic alpine campsites to Wallace Col, the low point south of 13,377-foot Mt. Wallace. Descending Wallace Col requires careful hand and foot placement for about 30 feet of steep rubble near the ridgetop, after which you'll need an ice axe to descend the snow slope below. Novices should be belayed here. Continue down through a sprawling grassy basin, staying left (west) of Echo, Moonlight, and Topsy Turvy Lakes. Look back for fine views of Haeckel, Wallace, and Powell peaks. Beyond Topsy Turvy, bear left on slabs, ford two streams, and find good campsites at Dingleberry Lake. Hike out on the trail to the Lake Sabrina trailhead and a 9-mile walk or shuttle to your car. (Or skip the road by adding 6.4 steep miles on Table Mountain Trail to South Lake Road, a mile below your car.) THE WAY: From Bishop, go 15 miles west on Bishop Creek Road; turn left onto South Lake Road. Drive 5.9 miles Mt. Agassiz Hike and scramble 4,200 feet to life-list views of the Palisades. This 13,893-foot peak is one of the Sierra's most striking daylong challenges for fit hikers and scramblers. Its west face spur, pioneered by Norman Clyde in 1925, is a straightforward (though strenuous) Class II, 14-mile round-trip from South Lake via Bishop Pass, The summit view to the southeast is among the most spectacular in the Sierra, spanning Agassiz Col to the range's highest and most ragged ridgelines. Look southeast for 14,242-foot North Palisade, California's fourth highest and perhaps gnarliest peak. Follow driving directions for the Wallace Col loop. 2 Harrison Pass Trek Ditch the crowds on a high, rugged loop. This 4- to 5-day, 48-mile circuit crosses the Kings-Kern Divide twice-first over 13,200-foot Forester Pass, the PCT's high point, then over Harrison Pass, a trailless notch between Mts. Ericsson and Stanford. You'll climb from deep in Kings Canyon to some of the Sierra's finest alpine country, then descend and fine granite-ledge campsites. Begin by hiking up cliff-ringed Bubbs Creek along the JMT/PCT to Forester Pass. Good campsites can be found at timberline below the pass. The southern side of Forester can be tricky with early-season snowdrifts, but the path quickly flattens out and leads you south to an intersection with the Kern River and Lake South America Trails. Follow them to Lake South America and climb north across open meadows toward Harrison Pass, an obvious notch marked by a large cairn below Mt. Stanford. In this off-trail section, you trace a route pioneered by newlyweds Bolton and Lucy Brown in 1896. The old sheep trail they found still appears on topos, but the track has long since faded. Until late summer you'll want an ice axe and sturdy boots to descend the north side of Harrison Pass. Drop down the snowy couloirs past a lake set beneath the towering cliffs of Mt. Ericsson, then thrash down through willow thickets and brush to East Creek. Descend the creek, fording as necessary trail, then a fence, and quickly descend 2.5 miles to a swift, roughly-thigh-deep crossing of Bubbs Creek just past mile 40. Turn left on your original approach trail, and reach your car in 8 miles. THE WAY: Start at the ranger station at the end of Kings Canyon Rd. (CA 180) 37.6 miles NE of Grant Grove. Permits, water, and bear lockers are available. TOP DAYHIKE: Granite Basin A strenuous but scenic grind yields idyllic camping and picnic spots. An excellent hike or overnight for the aerobically inclined, the Copper Creek Trail soars 5,000 feet in 6.35 miles, crosses a low pass, then drops to killer meadow sites in Granite Basin at mile 7.9. Good switchbacks and a gravelly trail make this less of a cartilage-buster than one might expect. Black bears and cougars are occasionally encountered along this trail, so travel noisily. The return is fast, so you can linger in the basin. Follow driving directions for Harrison Pass, and use the bearproof summits in the high, wild Kaweah Range. This 32-mile trek offers excellent alpine fishing and memorable walk-up summits, including Sawtooth Peak and the more challenging Red Kaweah. Head up the Sawtooth Pass Trail from Mineral King to Groundhog Meadow. Turn left at a blank, faded metal sign and head straight uphill (east-northeast) to rejoin Sawtooth Pass Trail (which made a long detour to Monarch Lake) and ascend neighboring Glacier Pass. At this scenic notch, you'll see the steep switch-backs of Black Rock Pass, your next destination. Descend cross-country to Black Rock Trail, then hump up and over the pass to Little Five Lakes and the old patrol cabin at Big Arroyo Creek. Get on the High Sierra Trail uphill of the cabin, and follow it southeast until you can climb straight northeast (off-trail) to a lake-dotted cirque beneath the southwest face of Red Kaweah. The summit route goes around the east side of the highest lake, then turns abruptly east to climb the north side of Red Kaweah climbing, but be cautious among the many small cliffs. To close the loop, reverse your course to Little Five Lakes, then turn left (east) and follow winding trail through Lost Canyon's gorgeous campsites, Columbine Lake Basin, and craggy Sawtooth Pass. From the pass, it's an easy walk up 12,343-foot Sawtooth Peak before dropping like an escalator down to Mineral King. THE WAY: From Three Rivers, go 4 miles NE on CA 198; turn SE onto Mineral King Rd. Drive 24 miles to Sawtooth trailhead. Beware: Mineral King's notorious marmots emerge salt-starved in spring to chew on engine belts and hoses. Some hikers put up chicken wire; others leave hoods open so the rodents don't take refuge inside. TOP DAYHIKE: Garfield &; Dillonwood Sequoia Groves Enjoy big sequoias far from the maddening boardwalk. Most giant sequoias are in developed front-country areas, but these secluded groves are private paradises for hikers with strong compass skills. Start at South Fork Campground, which is 13 Lake Kaweah. At road's end, do not head straight upcanyon along the Ladybug Trail. Instead, backtrack down the road and look for a subtle southbound trail traversing the brushy lower slopes of Dennison Ridge. Hike 4.3 miles to Garfield Grove. Look for King Arthur, the 10th largest sequoia on Earth; it's 270 feet tall and 104 feet around. To reach the huge Dillonwood Grove (which was added to Sequoia National Park in 2001 after its purchase by the Save-the-Redwoods League), continue upcanyon 1.23 miles to the abandoned Summit Trail, which switchbacks right (southwest), takes a long, rising traverse across the saddle of Dennison Ridge, then turns east. A mile beyond the saddle, bushwhack right (south) and descend straight down a broad slope 800 feet and into the 1,540-acre grove. TRIP PLANNER SEQUOIA &; KINGS CANYON NATIONAL PARKS Season June through early October. Snowbound passes, high creeks, and mosquitoes complicate early summer travel. Cautions The hazards of high altitude, tricky terrain with some common sense. Sierra black bears are particularly tough to ouifox; they're highly food- conditioned. Use trailhead storage lockers and rent bearproof food canisters for backcountry travel. Permits Required for all overnight trips in the parks and neighboring wilderness areas. You must obtain them from the land management agency that administers your entry trailhead; this often means you get permits for a hike that goes into the parks at a U.S. Forest Service office. Designated campsites are not typically required. Summer reservations are accepted for Sequoia-Kings beginning March 1, and at least 3 weeks prior to your trip. Fax or mail only. A few slots are reserved for walk-ins. Permits for trips starting inside Sequoia-Kings cost $15 per permit. Contact * Sequoia-Kings Canyon Wilderness Office (Harrison Pass and Sawtooth-Glacier-Kaweah loop): (559) 565-3766, www.nps.gov/seki * Inyo National Forest (Wallace Col loop): (760) 873-2485, **37;6145;TOOLONG Guidebook The High Sierra: Peaks, Passes, and Trails, by R. J. secor ($30) Map Park ($10), has enough detail for most of the route-finding here. The Giant Sequoias Evolutionary proof that size does matter Sequoias aren't the world's tallest trees; that honor goes to their cousins, the coastal redwoods. But they are the Earth's largest single living organisms by volume, and the biggest trees are more than 300 feet tall and 100 feet around. Mature sequoias require up to 1,000 gallons of water per day, so the largest ones grow in or near stream drainages. As they age, sequoia trunks become structurally complex; until recently, the gargantuan Washington Tree in Giant Forest contained 48 secondary trunks. In 2003, a lightning-caused fire damaged it; in 2005, winter snow tore off many upper trunks. Today the Washington Tree is only 115 feet tall, with limited foliage at the top, yet scientists think it may survive for centuries. For complete GPS coordinates to these hikes, go to www.backpacker.com/gps Sidebar PITCH A TENT AT THE EDGE OF GRANITE BASIN'S JUNCTION MEADOW. //
// From the first day we don cycling gloves, we are hysterically warned against it by well-meaning friends, experts and advertisements for sports drinks and energy bars, and we dread it until it comes (feeling smart or lucky because it hasn't), and then after it does, we regret it and add our story to the totem of misery and warning. It never gets any easier or less painful, or shows you any more respect-no matter how long you have been riding-and it always, inevitably, comes again to remind you of all that. It hurts deep, bonking does. It hurts not just externally like a broken collarbone, and not just internally like hunger, but like both at once. Bonking empties us. It steals energy from our muscles and organs, and thought from our brains. It destroys sensation and control. It ruins you for days after it hobbles you beside a road or strikes you down in the woods. And isn't it great? Let us praise the disgusting, no-good, low-down, despicable bonk. too bad. "Alfred Hiltbrunner's pale blue eyes are hard and sharp with the memory of a desolate stretch of road near the Alps. He sees himself splayed there. When he was in his early 20s, Hiltbrunner and a friend lost all their money gambling in Italy and had to ride home to Switzerland fueled by nothing but berries, grass and water. On a 150-mile leg, they bonked. Hiltbrunner fell off his bike. Couldn't move. Only serendipity worthy of a movie saved him-a friend happened to drive by on a scooter. Later, when Hiltbrunner raced as a member of the Swiss national team, that bonk would play through his mind. "Everyone trained, even the same or better than me," he remembers 38 years later. "But there were times when I was racing and just about dead, and I'd look at the guy next to me and I knew that he was tired, too. I pressed on and that killed 'em. I left even when I was dead. Because I survived that road to Zurich, I am stronger mentally." Bonking, says clinical psychologist Andrew Meyers, "is like nuclear power. it can light a whole city or poison the core of the earth." Or it can do both. Riders who have not yet experienced what English cyclists call "the knock" possess unlimited potential; they don't know that they're no better than the container of their bodies. Bonking caps your potential and seals it with a label that reads: "Know your limits." Kirk Waymire, a hulking 6-foot-4, 31 -year-old construction worker, was three months into his weekend warrior riding career. He'd knocked out 30-mile rides and had an unshakable belief in his own invincibility on the day he set out for an 80-miler along the Pacific Coast Highway and Laguna Canyon in California. His only onboard fuel: one-water bottle. About 60 miles into the ride, the beautiful sunny California day collapsed into a 15-foot tunnel same odd fascination with which people watch Fox TV "reality" specials, passengers in cars craned their necks to stare at Waymire's ashen face. At a stoplight, a woman leaned out of her car and asked the drained cyclist if he was okay. He nodded and kept chopping homeward. "I dreaded stoplights, because it took more energy to unclip and get going again than to just keep going," he says. Waymire hit his limit. He bonked. But he saw salvation in a roadside burrito stand. Concentrating on forcing the words from his mouth, he asked for a burrito. "I sounded like I was drunk or something," Waymire says, vividly remembering how he struggled just to make his mouth move. "They looked at me like I was crazy." He hadn't packed any money, so he offered his bike in exchange for tortillas. No swap (it was against burrito-stand policy), so he stumbled on. As he passed a lifeguard station bars, then pointed him to a phone booth to call his wife. "My body had never felt that bad before. I'm not the type to quit, but I couldn't go anymore. Took all I had to walk and muster enough energy to call my wife." // On the phone, he slurred an assurance to his wife that he hadn't been in an accident and said, "I've heard of a bonk, and this is what I think happened to me." He stretched out on a patch of grass to wait for her. His brain swirled. He knew that if he lost consciousness he'd be taken to the hospital. He wished his bike would have bought him a burrito. Mercifully, his wife pulled up. Waymire has never done another onebottle, long ride into the unknown. He prepares with carbs, protein and plenty of liquids. But, he says, his bonk taught him more about himself than nutrition. "If you do" he says. "The bonk gave me a lot of respect for the unknown. I thought I was invincible, that an 80-mile ride was no big deal, that I could just take it easy and pedal slow when I got tired. But even easy doesn't work when you bonk. When it's over, it's over. Bonking made me realize I'm just another human being." And, echoing Hiltbrunner's Swiss Alps epiphany, Waymire recalls how hitting bottom helped him when he went on to race the Hawaiian Ironman. "About four or five times I thought I just couldn't go on. But I thought about that bonk, and I got some extra strength when I turned inward to myself." We don't suggest that you set out to bonk as a learning experience. "That would just be masochistic," says Edmund Burke, a sports physiologist and the director of the Exercise Science Program at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs. "It's toxins." The total-body depletion French riders call fringale deserves its nefarious reputation. The physical strain can trash a training schedule or hospitalize a rider for dehydration or exhaustion. But some pro riders and coaches muse that there might be a physical benefit to bonking. // Years before he became the mutton-chopped guru of mountain biking, Bob Roll woke up in a ditch thinking he was a koala bear. "Man, I was suffering," says Roll, the memory still as bright as the sun that blasted him through the canopy of eucalyptus leaves in Marin County, California. "Bonking is a singular and particular sensation. It's not fatigue. You can be totally fine then, POW! It can happen in 20 pedal strokes. You're on top of the world, then comatose It's an exercise-induced lobotomy." But, he says, "Some of my best races have been after bonks. It's a way to make the body learn to burn its reserves efficiently. When you bonk feels good to go through total degradation and let the body rebuild itself." Chris Carmichael, Lance Armstrong's coach and founder of Carmichael Training Systems, doesn't recommend bonking as a training tool. But he does say "there can be a rebound effect." A bonk might squeeze your body like a sponge. "When you dunk a dry sponge in water," says Lisa Dorfman, a sports nutritionist, former professional triathlete and author of The Vegetarian SPorts Nutrition Guide, "it doesn't soak up a lot. The next time, it gets more." Tom Miller, an 18-year-old expert cross-country racer, bonked in the' 98 Red Wing, Minnesota, NORBA race. On the far end of the last lap he crawled through the mud, sifting for opened Gu packets discarded by the racers who had already crossed the finish line. On the verge of unconsciousness, he squeezed what he could find into his mouth. Mud freely mingled with the sticky gel. He didn't says. "It felt like I was on the brink of death." During the off-season, Miller concentrated on strength training and nutrition. This year he won the junior Olympics nationals in Red Wing. "That bonk was a turning point for me," he says. When a Kansa brave was sent away from the tribe on a vision quest, he was not given food, water or much else for survival. If the spirits were with him, he would see visions that would guide him the rest of his life. The slightly unromantic reality: He bonked. // As glycogen, the body's energy chemical, gets squeezed off from the brain, "you get to a point beyond the rational, and then you can interpret things differently," says the University of Memphis's psychologist Meyers, who also consults with the U.S. Olympic committee. "It could be compared to a religious experience -- or to drugs." We're a long way from spirit animals and visions. America safeties and catch-alls. There are support groups and self-help books. Credit cards and tate-payment arrangements, no-fault divorce and easy bankruptcy. It is a luxurious time. We do not look at the sky from a dustbowl depression and pray for rain. When you bonk, you are taken to a place most well-fed, TV-watching Americans don't- go-, The bottom. What if, when you hit the bottom you don't find a void? What if you find a resilience? Instead of emptiness, the will to ride again? Bonking caps your potential, but frees your ability to endure. Bonks heighten and alter senses. Food tastes delicious after a bonk. The primal hunger may be the closest a man can get to understanding a pregnancy craving. Bonks have linked people to times and places of their past, or let them see things that never existed. Riders have reported yellow lines rising up from the road to strike them. Being stalked by mountain lions. Finding God on the backside of the White. But thank the cycling gods when you do. Sidebar
FOUR EASY WAYS TO IMPROVE YOUR ODDS AGAINST THE DISEASE BY SUSAN. BARR, PH.D. // Even though heart disease is the primary cause of death for Americans, there's nothing like the thought of cancer to make the blood run cold. It affects us all: young and old, famous and infamouseven seemingly invincible athletes such as Lance Armstrong. Cancer doesn't follow any rules, but science has shown it generally follows a few guidelines. Despite its capricious nature, evidence indicates that about onethird of cancer deaths in the U.S. are related to diet-which puts some control over cancer back into your hands. (Ifyou don't smoke, what you eat is your biggest modifiable cancer factor.) Of course, changing your diet won't guarantee you'll ride into the sunset cancer-free (genetics are a huge factor). But research indicates that a good diet can stack the deck in your favor. Here's how. FAT The fat/cancer link is highly controversial. International comparisons suggest it's important-for example, fat intake is higher in the U.S. than Japan. However, studies don't always find higher cancer rates in those eating more fat. For example, in the Nurses Health Study, the fat intake of over 80,000 nurses was assessed over a number of years, and a lowfat diet did not protect them against breast cancer. (The ongoing Women's Health Initiative, in which groups of women will maintain diets of either 20% or 30% fat for 12 years, should answer this question definitively, but not until 2009.) What has been confirmed is that too much fat contributes to obesity, and that obesity is linked to certain cancers and heart disease. (It will slow you down on hills, too.) PHYTOESTROGENS These plant hormones include isoflavonoids (found in soy products) and lignans (found in flax seeds). They've been linked to lower rates of prostate and breast cancer in Asian populations who eat large amounts of soy. Phytoestrogens also inhibit cancer in cell-culture studies. Research is underway on men who have prostate cancer (or soy-supplemented low-fat diets reduce cancer. HETEROCYCLIC AMINES Last year an article in the Journal of the National Cancerlnstitute made the news by reporting that breast cancer risk was 4.62 times greater in women who preferred heavily-browned meat than in those who prefer it rare or medium. The authors speculate that heterocyclic amines, formed during high-temperature cooking, may be the cause. These compounds cause cancer in animal studies and have been linked to human colon cancer. Unfortunately, the authors only asked the women how they liked their meat done but didn't ask them how much they ate, so the results must be interpreted carefully-particularly after considering the known risks of food poisoning from undercooked meats. RESVERATROL This compound, found in red wine, is a potent antioxidant. Antioxidants inhibit oxidative damage to cells, which is thought to contribute to risk of cancer and heart disease. In lab studies, resveratrol inhibits all stages of cancer growth in human cancer cells. And it acts biologically against atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). Should we all Resveratrol may work when added directly to cells in glass dishes, but whether we absorb useful amounts from wine is open to question. And red wine's alcohol has been linked to breast cancer. // How to Avoid the Big C Sidebar FAT The Bottom Line Limit fat to no more than 30% of calories and maintain a healthy weight. (One gram of fat equals nine calories-a useful fact for calculating total percentages.) Sidebar PHYTOESTROGENS The Bottom Line Soy products are a good bet for cancer prevention, and may also reduce heart disease risk. So get yourself a vegetarian cookbook and give those tofu recipes a try. Also, buy breads and cereals containing flax seed. Sidebar HETEROCYCLIC AMINES (FORMED DURING HIG-TEMPERATURE COOKING) The Bottom Line When cooking meat (unlike when cycling), safety is found in the middle of the road, so cook meat until it's no longer red, but avoid turning it black. Sidebar RESVERATROL The Bottom Line (ANTIOXIDANT) The Bottom Line Grape juice provides about half link, so drink up! //
THE READER Michael Miles, 31 Information system sales Single, club racer Grand Rapids, MI THE PROBLEM "Every summer, I work like a dog to hit my weight goal of 160-165 pounds. When I do, I finish top-10 in local races. Yet every winter, I gain 15-20 pounds and lose fitness. I pledge that I'll work out, ride every day and keep the weight off, but the peaks and valleys on the Excel spreadsheet I use to track my fitness easily outdo the mightiest of roller coasters. How can I stay fit year-round?" THE COACH Ryan Tie is head coach of the 100-strong University of Colorado cycling team, which placed second at the 2001 NCCA road championships and won the three previous years. Tie is also the' 96 NCCA road race champion and former member of the U.S. national team. "My 3-month winter schedule for Michael focuses a month on structured base miles, a month of adding higher intensity, and a month to focus strictly on racing," he says. Want to train with Tie Focus 2 or 3 days on longer rides in Zones 2 and 3, and recover the others. This training will help Michael lose some weight by increasing the fat-burning enzymes, making him more efficient and allowing him to burn fat instead of stored glycogen in the blood and muscles. Follow each day for Weeks 1-3, then rest on Week 4. COACH'S NOTES The value of training lies in the healing of the body.I like to see riders train for three weeks, then rest (cut ride lengths in half) for one. 0 Interval workouts should consist of more extended efforts the first couple of weeks. Toward the end of the phase, they should be shorter and at a near-max workload. Keep doing the intervals during a session until the quality drops off-that means you can't get your heart rate up. Your heart is telling you that it is ready to rest. Listen to it. FINDING YOUR ZONE Target zones can be calculated with a formula, but they can also be estimated by are better because they give you a better idea of what is going on with your body. WARM-UP: 30 minutes between Zone 1 and 2 until you start to sweat. ZONE 1: Less than 125bpm heart rate. (Like taking your bike for a walk-so slow you feel stupid.) ZONE 2:72% of max HR (You feel like you're getting a workout, but can still talk with a training partner.) ZONE 3:73% to 84% of max HR. (A little uncomfortable. You could maintain this pace for an hour or so, but not much more.) ZONE 4: 84% to 92% of max HR. (Very uncomfortable-the pace you'd ride a 10-mile time trial or a mountain climb in a race. Somewhere in this zone is what's known as your lactate threshold-where lactic acid accumulates faster than your body can clear it.) ZONE 5: Max effort such as a sprint or all-out jump up a short hill. (A pace that can't be maintained for! Mimic Michael's program and you'll keep winter fitness-for free. But the best way to ride your best is to sign up-and pay up-for a monthly customized training plan that fits your schedule, your body, your goals. For details, click into our Training Center-powered by CTS (coaches of Lance) at BICYCLING.com. Simulate a race in training by riding for several hours, then doing some intense work such as hill intervals at the end.
HandBOOK Headnote 4 no-sweat tricks guaranteed to increase speed // A smooth-running bike makes you faster: Just ask the pros. In the second world cup race of 2000, a few riders from the GT, Kona and Mongoose teams installed on-board chain lube systems to battle the thick dust on the Mazatlan, Mexico, course. Pieced together with medical supplies, including IV tubing and a syringe mounted on the seat tube, the contraption let a rider inject the chain with lube when it got too dry. But you don't need to snoop around race pits to boost your speed. Here are four tweaks that'll make your bike faster than ever. And the real beauty: You don't need loads of maintenance know-how or a box full of tools to make these adjustments. BEGINNER TRICKS 1. Pump' Em Up The easiest and most important way to improve your speed is to correctly adjust your tire pressure. An underinflated road tire can add enough drag to slow you 2 to 3 mph. If you run 75 psi in road tires intended for 100 need to-and your tire wears sooner. Tire pressure isn't so simple off-road: If your tires are pumped up too much, you'll slip on climbs and flail over slippery roots and rocks. You may improve speed by lowering tire pressure. Start with about 45 psi. The more technical the trail, the lower you should go with the air pressure. Some lightweight riders even dip below 30 psi. On smoother trails, add pressure, up to about 60 psi. Tool: A pump with a gauge Cost: Nada Shop cost: C'mondo this yourself Difficulty: * Time: 3 minutes 2. Boost Braking Power It sounds counterintuitive-but to go faster, you need good brakes. Well-maintained brakes let you roll into corners faster yet with more control, and enable you to leave corners faster because of better line choice. Dirty rims and worn pads can add seconds to your time in a corner-rich event, and well-maintained brakes may even help you avoid a supporting role in somebody else's crash. The by wiping them with a clean cloth. Also, buff your brake pads with an emery cloth to keep them fresh. Tools: Emery cloth Cost: Nada Shop cost: $10 (labor) Difficulty: &; Time: 5-10 minutes INTERMEDIATE TRICK 3. Clean Derailleur Jockey Pulleys An often forgotten speed-sucker is the lowly derailleur jockey pulley. These pulleys turn so rapidly that dirty or poorly lubed bushings or worn-out ball bearings can cost you speed. To check your pulleys, remove the chain or hold it off a pulley, then slowly spin the pulley. It should turn smoothly and freely. If not, remove and clean it with something pointy (like a small screwdriver covered with a shop cloth) to get all the grit out of the groove. Re-lube with a drop of oil (or replace the ball bearings), then add a drop of blue Loctite to the small bolt that holds the pulley in the derailleur. Tools: Set of hex wrenches and small screwdriver Cost: Nothing, if you) Difficulty: * * Time: 10-15 minutes ADVANCED TRICK 4. Fine-Tune Hub Bearings Hubs that are too tight or loose are inefficient and sap speed. To fine-tune your hub bearings, use two cone wrenches. One goes on the outer locknut and the other wrench fits on the cone nut, which controls how tight or loose the cone presses against the bearings inside the hub. Turning the cone nut clockwise tightens the bearings; counterclockwise loosens. Eliminating play while avoiding overtightening requires loads of patience. One handy trick: Only tighten or loosen about 1/16th of a turn at a time-about the distance of one spoke to the next on a 32spoke wheel. This is an easy way to measure how much you've tightened or loosened the wrench. Once you've adjusted the cone nut, re-tighten the locknut. Looseness Test: Grab the top of the wheel with your thumb and forefinger while supporting the frame in your other hand. Wiggle the wheel side to side. If there's lateral movement, you need the wheel and spin it while holding the axle ends with your fingers. The wheel should spin smoothly with the axles resting lightly on your fingertips. Excessive drag makes it hard to hold onto the axles. To fix, slightly loosen the hub bearings. Tools: Set of cone wrenches Cost: $15 (if you don't have the wrenches) Shop cost: $20 (labor) Difficulty: * * * Time: 15-30 minutes -John Olsen Sidebar INTO (AND OUT OF) THE BREECH How to drop into a V-dip and max your momentum on the way out Sidebar APPROACH Ride to the lip at walking pace. GEAR Click into a gear easy enough to let you pedal up the steep face ahead. Sidebar HEADChin up; don't lean over the bar, unless you like endos. PEDALS As you descend into the V, keep your feet at 2 o'clock and 8 o'clock with your most powerful foot forward. ARMSKeep them bent on the approach, then straighten and push down as the front wheel your elbows again to help pop up the steep side. HANDS When rolling down, rotate your wrists forward to keep the front wheel grounded. On the way out, pull the bar with each pedal stroke for more traction. BUTT Float it just in front of the saddle through the entry, then plant it on the tip of the saddle for the climb. BACK Slightly arched forward and low on the bike. LEGS Slightly bent; once you roll across the bottom of the dip, snap forward and screw on the power. -Mark Riedy //
Everything that flies or swims along this coastal refuge depends on the sea's bounty to survive... // PHOTOGRAPHS BY SUSIE POST RUST Vernon Byrd, bundled from head to toe in an orange survival suit, clutched the side of a bouncing Zodiac as it skittered toward a ragged, two-humped island jutting from the frigid blackness of the Bering Sea. Bogoslof. Biologists like Byrd say the name as if the island were sacred, and in a way it is. The name means "theologian" in Russian. No ship can sail within three miles of its shore; no fisherman can venture within eighteen. Even the biologists in charge of the island visit only every few years so as not to disturb the raucous array of wildlife that inhabits every nook and cranny, from hordes of tufted puffins burrowing in the volcanic earth to a handful of Steller sea lions-twice the weight of polar bears-lolling like giant sausages on the black sand. "When I first came here in 1973, about 5,000 Steller sea lions ringed the island," Byrd said, splashing ashoren't let us on the beach. "Now he counted only about two dozen massive heads above the throng of northern fur seals, the sea lion's smaller, darker cousin." Everything points to good prey availability at Bogoslof, "Byrd said with a tinge of Carolina drawl." But sea lions continue to decline. And that's interesting. "Of course nearly everything in this salty realm is interesting to Vernon Byrd, who claims to have one of the best jobs in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. As senior biologist for the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, Byrd has the run of one of the strangest and farthest flung pieces of public real estate in the nation: a mostly vertical, guano-encrusted archipelago that includes 2,500 islands, cliffs, and outcroppings, not to mention 20 active volcanoes. If over-laid on the lower 48 states, his 4.5-million-acre domain would extend from Georgia to California to North Dakota. Aside from a few scattered fishing villages and military outposts, most of the refuge it's a mecca for wildlife, attracting one of the largest concentrations of seabirds and marine mammals in the world. More than 40 million seabirds-80 percent of Alaska's total-and thousands of sea lions, sea otters, seals, and walruses flock to these storm-wracked shores to rest, breed, and raise young during the short northern summer. The heart of the refuge lies in the Aleutian Islands, that long bony finger of Alaska that tickles the chin of Russia. The Aleutians separate two of the richest marine ecosystems on the planet: the North Pacific and the Bering Sea. The plankton-laden waters support an astonishing array of marine life, not to mention thousands of fishermen, processing-plant workers, and Alaska natives. The symbiotic relationship between land, water, people, and wildlife is as palpable here as the shroud-like fog or horizontal rain. But despite such apparent abundance, all is not well on this Alaska coast. Since seabirds and marine mammals consume vast quantities of fish and plankton, they make good bellwethers for predators in western Alaska waters have vanished within the past 50 years, including more than half of the northern fur seals, 75 percent of the sea otters, and 80 percent of the Steller sea lions, which were listed as endangered in 1997. Some scientists think a slight rise in the temperature of the Bering Sea may favor leaner prey species, like pollock, over fattier capelin and herring. Others suspect high levels of DDT and PCBs in the animals, toxins that have migrated north in the atmosphere or were spilled at military bases on the islands. Environmental groups point the finger at a commercial fishery that removes some two million metric tons of potential prey from the Bering Sea each year-roughly half of all U.S. fish landings. The issue boiled over three years ago after several groups sued the National Marine Fisheries Service, the agency responsible for regulating fishermen as well as protecting endangered marine species. A federal judge sided with environmentalists, prompting the service to ban trawlers for 20 nautical miles around key sea lion sites, who claimed it had little scientific basis. Stevens inserted language into an appropriations bill that granted a year to come up with a more palatable plan-today a hodge-podge of protected zones ranging from 10 to 20 miles-and he earmarked more than 40 million dollars for new research to find the cause of the sea lions' decline. How to best protect the sea lions remains hotly debated, leaving scientists like Vernon Byrd to scour the refuge for clues. The Steller sea lion isn't the first of Georg Wilhelm Steller's discoveries to run afoul of humans. As Vitus Bering's naturalist on the Russian expedition that discovered Alaska in 1741, the German scientist spent barely three days on Alaska soil, yet returned to Russia with descriptions of numerous species unknown to the Western world. Many carry his name, including the Steller's jay, Steller's eider, and Steller's sea cow, a docile relative of the manatee. But it was a species that does not bear Steller's name that entertained him the most. cunning and amusing in its habits, and at the same time ingratiating and amorous," wrote Steller after observing a frolicking sea otter. "It deserves from us all the greatest reverence." Bering's sailors, however, had something else in mind. After surviving a shipwreck and scurvy, which took Bering's life, the crew limped back to Petropavlovsk in a makeshift boat loaded down with 900 sea otter pelts. For each pelt, Chinese merchants paid the equivalent of a year's wage for a Russian clerk, beginning a legacy of natural resource exploitation along Alaska's coast that continues to this day. Russian fur traders enslaved the seafaring Aleuts who inhabited the islands, forcing them to hunt sea otters, and later fur seals. While Aleut hunters speared otters from their skin kayaks, known as baidarkas, the Russians lived like Cossack kings among the Aleut women. Their motto: "God is high above and the tsar far away." By the time the Russians sold Alaska to the United half a million sea otters and millions of fur seals, while their guns and diseases had reduced the Aleut population from an estimated 12,000 to roughly 2,000. Not to be outdone, U.S. fur traders more than doubled the annual Russian fur harvest. When sea otters and fur seals were finally protected by international treaty in 1911, the otter was all but extinct, and only a tenth of what had once been 1.5 million fur seals remained. President William Howard Taft declared the Aleutian chain a wildlife reserve in 1913 primarily to protect the sea otters, and the population slowly began to recover. By the 1980s, with the help of Fish and Wildlife Service biologists, otters had reestablished themselves on many islands and were back to healthy levels of more than 65,000 in the Aleutians. But then Jim Estes noticed their numbers drop again. Estes, a soft-spoken U.S. Geological Survey scientist, has spent most of the past 30 years studying the interwoven relationships between otters, sea urchins, and kelp in the islands, and. His latest theory: The falling population of sea otters, fur seals, and Steller sea lions has nothing to do with temperature increases, overfishing, or contaminants. Estes thinks they're being eaten. On a crisp summer morning I joined Estes and fellow researcher Tim Tinker for an otter survey of the waters around Adak Island, a former Cold War spy base so far out in the Pacific it's closer to Petropavlovsk than to Anchorage. Estes handed me an orange flotation suit before we boarded a 17-foot Boston Whaler for the survey. "They're not really survival suits," he said, pulling the heavy coveralls over his lanky frame. "They just help rescuers find your body." Luckily it was one of those rare bluebird days that occur perhaps once a month in the Aleutians, when the clouds part, the wind dies, and the rugged splendor of nature's handiwork is etched against the pale northern sky. Soon we were nosing along a rocky shore seemingly unchanged since Steller's by each tide. Rainbow-hued harlequin ducks and mottled brown common eiders flushed from hideouts, while mountains rose 2,000 feet straight up from the jade water. But as we cruised through the watery niches that were classic otter habitat, we spotted few otters. Those we did see were wary: Their wizened faces quickly submerged at our approach. By the end of the day, we'd tallied just 59 adults and 21 pups. Estes shook his head. "A decade ago we would have seen 600." That evening, over baked halibut and beer, Estes explained his theory. When he visited nearby Amchitka in the early 1990s and discovered that half the island's sea otters had disappeared, he found high levels of DDT and PCBs in those that remained. He suspected the contaminants might be the problem. But on other islands he found populations with low contaminant levels, and they were falling too. He was baffled. Then one of his colleagues witnessed a startling phenomenon: A killer whale came up of much larger sea lions and seals, few had ever seen one take an otter, which would be the orca equivalent of an after-dinner mint. But the next day the researcher observed another attack. Then Tim Tinker saw it happen at Adak. Soon some of the otters they'd implanted with radio transmitters were disappearing. Though Estes was skeptical at first, he and Tinker began to suspect the connection when they noticed that sea otters in Adak's Clam Lagoon were not disappearing. The lagoon otters don't go out to sea, and orcas are blocked from entering the lagoon by the pilings of a small one-lane bridge at its mouth. But elsewhere off Adak, Tinker said, "otters were dropping like stones." By 2000 up to 90 percent of the otters on some islands were gone. What would make an orca that evolved to eat great whales and other large prey target a 60-pound otter? Estes believes the root of the problem may go back to the days of commercial whaling. From million whales in the North Pacific and southern Bering Sea. With the large whales gone, Estes thinks the orcas turned to sea lions and harbor seals, whose numbers then fell through the late 1980s. Once they ate their way through much of the pinniped population, he believes the orcas changed prey again, taking some 40,000 sea otters in the central Aleutians alone in the past 15 years. "It's an incredible theory," Estes said. "It may or may not be true. But it makes a lot of sense." Maybe. But Chuck Fowler, former head of the fur seal program for the National Marine Fisheries Service, believes the orca hypothesis minimizes the impact of the most adaptable and robust predator in these waters-humans. "Commercial fishing takes biomass out of the Bering Sea at levels ten- to one-hundred-fold more than the marine mammals are taking," said Fowler. If fish scales were money, the muddy streets of the city of Unalaska-also called Dutch Harbor after its port-would be paved the town of about 4,300 permanent residents boasts the best anchorage in the islands, making it ground zero for the fishery-marine mammal debate. Thousands of transient fishermen and processing-plant workers come here each year to find their fortune. "It's like the end of the Wild Wild West," said Rick Knecht, director of the local Museum of the Aleutians. "Even in the rest of Alaska people think we're just a bunch of drunk fishermen brawling in the streets out here. But now more families are moving in. It's becoming a real town." Since 1988 Dutch Harbor has consistently ranked as the top fishing port in the nation in either pounds landed or value of product or both. It's the latest upswing in a historic boom-and-bust cycle that began when the village was the western center of the Russian sea otter trade, followed by the herring boom and crab boom, all of which eventually fizzled. The money fish of the moment is walleye pollock, a sleek, prolific cousin of landings. Big trawlers, ranging from 130-foot catcher boats to 300-foot floating processors, are allowed to net more than a million metric tons of pollock each year. Long a staple in the varied diet of Steller sea lions, pollock is now in just about every fish stick, fish-filet sandwich, and tub of imitation crabmeat sold in the U.S., Europe, and the Pacific Rim. "Most people aren't aware of what's out here," yelled Rocky Caldero, manager of the UniSea processing plants, as he led me through a maze of machinery, conveyors, and catwalks that was throbbing to a high-voltage hum. "The plants here are the largest and most complex fish-processing plants in the U.S. The top three or four in the world in terms of volume. We'll process 2.2 million pounds a day of just pollock." Virtually every ounce of the fish is used. The roe is a popular and expensive gift in Japan. Filets are flash frozen and sold throughout Europe and the U.S. a white, tasteless, rubbery paste that is a major ingredient in artificial crabmeat. The waste is ground into food for eel farms in Asia. Even the oil is burned as fuel in the plants' generators. The sea lion ruling that temporarily extended the fishing ban around rookeries in 2000 hit the industry hard, said Caldero. Boats had to go farther out to get the pollock, reducing the freshness of their catch. "Instead of getting fish less than 40 hours old, you get fish 60 to 80 hours old," Caldero said. "You can't do much with that. You can't make filets. Roe quality is diminished." Like most people in the business, Caldero buys the industry position that the pollock fleet is the best managed fishery in the world. "Most people in the industry want to protect it to make money," Caldero said. "They don't want the sea lions to go the way of the sea cows. I don't think read say there's not enough nutritional value in pollock to make the sea lions survive." Those studies, based on captive-feeding trials, show the animals lost weight on a steady diet of pollock but not on oilier fish such as herring or sand lance. It's come to be known as the junk food theory. Since pollock are voracious predators of other prey species, the industry line goes, then fishermen should catch more pollock to allow the other species to rebound. "None of these theories can be proven," said Ken Stump, one of the Greenpeace architects of the environmental lawsuit that led to the fishing ban. "The industry latches on to the junk food hypothesis, ocean warming, and orca predation because they believe it exonerates them if it's a natural phenomenon." Stump believes that the removal of 150 billion pounds of fish from Alaska's waters since the 1960s has likely caused a fundamental shift in the marine ecosystem: There simply isn't enough food left to support historic sides. The wiry, bearded fisherman has been an environmental activist for two decades in Unalaska. When he's not fighting to protect local small-boat fishermen from the politically powerful factory trawlers, he's either pulling halibut over the rail of his 32-foot long-liner or sipping his whiskey neat from a corner stool at the Elbow Room-Unalaska's notorious bar and the de facto headquarters of the Bering Sea fleet. Yet he sided with the big boys against the 20-mile ban around rookeries. "The folks that were hurt the worst were the small-boat fishery," said Storrs from his perch at the Elbow. "If the ban had stayed in place, I would be out of business as would everyone else. It made it very hard to be an environmentalist in western Alaska." Still, Storrs believes the industry is at least partly responsible for the sea lions' decline, but not because the animals are starving. "There was a huge take of sea lions by the pollock trawl fleet in the 1970s," legendary. They were getting 40 sea lions a tow and dumping the carcasses overboard." In fact, scientists estimate that U.S. and foreign trawlers may have caught as many as 50,000 sea lions in Alaska waters between 1960 and 1990, while fishermen legally shot an estimated 34,000 during the same period, ostensibly to protect their livelihood and their gear. Long viewed as a nuisance to fishermen, the sea lions finally gained protection in 1990 from shooting by all but Alaska native subsistence hunters. Studying the ocean's inhabitants has never been easy, especially in the often brutal seas that Steller sea lions call home. Vernon Byrd believes that natural and human factors have combined against the animal. "No doubt removing the fish has had large effects," Byrd said. "But will this cause extinction? We don't know. Then here come the killer whales. They've always eaten a certain number of sea lions. But now with the population depressed, they take more, percentage-wise. Then you have a things start stacking up. But I try to explain all that to a guy with boat payments, and he says, 'Are you sure?'" Byrd paused, then answered the question. "No, I'm not." Times may be good for the pollock fishermen of Unalaska, but they're decidedly rocky for the people of the Pribilofs, the small group of islands smack in the middle of the Bering Sea. Here the largest remaining Aleut villages of St. Paul and St. George, each on a separate island within the refuge, are barely keeping their economics afloat. The two islands, breeding grounds for the largest northern fur seal colonies in the world, were the mother lode of the fur seal trade for nearly two centuries, a source of unimaginable wealth, and an underlying force behind Seward's Folly in 1867. The federal government's sale of furs from the Pribilof harvest repaid the 7.2-million-dollar purchase price for Alaska within 20 years. The 1911 fur seal treaty banned taking the by the Pribilof Islanders, who dutifully slaughtered seals for Uncle Sam until the mid-1980s, when animal-rights activists and a dwindling fur market shut down the federal harvests for good. Karin Holser opened a closet door in her office in St. Paul and pulled out samples of what all the fuss was about. The first was a tanned sea otter pelt, jet black and so soft to the touch it was hard to tell where air ended and hair began. Beside it she threw a fur seal hide, buff brown, but equally luxurious. "This is where the animal-rights folks did us a disservice," said Holser, coordinator of the islands' stewardship program for local youth. "Here was a sustainable harvest that supported an indigenous village. People were feeding their families, not a huge industry." After commercial sealing ended, St. Paul joined the lucrative crab fisheries in the Bering Sea. Then the Pribilof red and blue king crab stocks crashed, followed by the opilio snow crab stocks. Crabbing seasons, and 80 percent of the tax base evaporated. Today two dozen small longline vessels fish for halibut around the island, providing up to half of many families' incomes. Though the steady paychecks of the sealing days are sorely missed, the heavy hand of the federal government is not. Many elders still smolder over their treatment in World War II, when the Pribilof Islanders were evacuated to squalid "duration villages" near Juneau while the U.S. military took over their islands. Forced to crowd into an abandoned cannery and a mining camp without proper food, heat, or running water, the Pribilof Islanders lost 32 people to pneumonia, measles, and tuberculosis during their two-year internment. Most were elders and children. To make matters worse, when they finally returned home in 1944, they discovered that U.S. soldiers had vandalized their houses and their church. "We were really mad," said 80-year-old "Auntie" Mary Bourdukofsky, who had two children in diapers at the time. "We saw pictures with bunk beds and white ceilings. Our feelings really hurt inside for treating us worse than the enemy." But her wartime experience and the years of paternalistic management by the Fish and Wildlife Service, which controlled almost all aspects of island life until the early 1980s, hasn't dampened Auntie Mary's enthusiasm for her wind-swept home. "My mom said we live by the sea, and we never grow old," she said with a smile. That same twinkle lit the eyes of 25-year-old Candace Stepetin as she gave me a tour of St. Paul in a pickup with Van Morrison's "Brown Eyed Girl" blaring through the speakers. Stepetin works with the St. Paul stewardship program cutting fishing nets and plastic packaging from seals that come ashore with a garrote of such garbage around their necks. She showed me three neat puncture scars in her right hand, courtesy of a two-year-old seal she was trying to liberate. "If it had been a larger seal, he could have pulled my arm off, the bar, the Russian Orthodox church, and a hundred or so clapboard houses where 500 residents live. The village hugs a small harbor protected by a 50-foot-tall breakwater. Outside the village the island rises in lush hills of purple lupine and wild celery, dotted with Aleutian buttercup. But it's the ash-colored beaches attracting hundreds of thousands of northern fur seals, along with more than two million birds that nest on neighboring St. George, that spurred the islands' nickname "the Galapagos of the North." At the rookeries, the big 400- to 600-pound males staked out their territories, which they will defend-fighting and breeding without food or drink-for up to two months. Most of the females, however, had yet to arrive. Only a few lay beside bleating pups. The young bachelors avoided the big bulls, content to sun themselves on their favorite beaches. While the mass of steaming, writhing bodies is impressive to the first-time visitor, the image is deceiving. Nearly a million fur seals still that's half the number observed in 1951, when in these pages biologist Karl Kenyon described the rookeries as "the greatest assemblage of wild animals to be seen in such a limited area." Compared with photos from Kenyon's time, the beaches look practically empty. Though federal harvests ended in St. Paul in 1983, the islanders still kill about a thousand juvenile male seals each year for food. The elders relish the boiled meat, pickled flippers, and a rendered seal fat dish some call Aleut Jell-O, but most of the young people I met preferred microwavable pizzas from the local grocery store. The hunts are community affairs. During one roundup, six islanders set out across the beach to make the initial cull. The seals stampeded toward the water. Yet the Aleuts managed to cut off about a hundred of the younger ones. After separating a dozen or so seals from the main group, four men, their oarlike seal sticks held high, circled the animals as the fog rolled in. by a few children butchered the seals quickly, cutting out the ribs, the liver, the shoulders, the flippers. Tastes just like veal, said one man. Better than a turkey dinner, said another. A few of the once precious skins were saved for crafts, but most were carried to the carcass dump with the rest of the offal. There are bright spots in the Bering Sea picture. Refuge biologists have spent decades nursing the Aleutian Canada goose back from the edge of extinction and-thanks to a concerted effort to remove non-native foxes from breeding islands-the birds are now thriving. Steller sea lion numbers are up slightly for the first time in decades, giving researchers hope that they may have reached the bottom of their long slide. And some islands, such as Bogoslof, seem to be drawing animals from traditional breeding areas such as the Pribilofs. "It's really interesting to compare Bogoslof and the Pribs," Vernon Byrd said, back on Bogoslof. "They're geographically similar, with northern fur seals and red-legged kittiwakes have increased here, while declining in the Pribilofs. Why is the environment adequate at Bogoslof and not in the Pribs?" One of the factors dropped right at our feet-a four-inch-long Atka mackerel, shiny silver on the bottom and midnight blue on top. The fish were flying by in a steady stream in the beaks of tufted puffins, which buzzed overhead like spacecraft in a Jetsons cartoon. The fish are so big, Byrd said, that a puffin chick will have to wait for the head to dissolve in its stomach before it can swallow the tail. "It'll feed them all day," said Byrd. "That means much less effort for the parents, who would otherwise have to feed them three or four times in the same period with tiny pollock. It translates into better breeding success. Interesting." Despite the dearth of sea lions on Bogoslof, Byrd is optimistic that the data will soon show what the problems are and that a combined effort to avert their extinction. Meantime, the prospects for other Bogoslof creatures are looking better. In his inspection of the island, Byrd found that at least half the redlegged kittiwake nests had chicks, and the occupancy rate of puffin burrows was high. Male fur seals had established their territories on the beaches. And the sun was still shining, making Byrd practically giddy. "Sunniest day I've ever seen on Bogoslof," he said. We headed back to the landing site and put on our orange suits for the ride out to the refuge's research vessel Tiglalg circle, at anchor a half mile offshore. The waves, though less than head-high, cracked on the steep beach with surprising force. We dragged the Zodiac down to the water, waited for a lull, and began paddling madly. But not madly enough. The first wave slapped the boat broadside. The next sucked it up and over, dumping us into the 38-degree water. After crawling onto the beach like arthritic crabs, numbing surf. A wave feathered 20 yards in front of us. We barely made it over the crest as the motor cranked and were soon skimming out of the impact zone to the waiting ship. "All right!" Byrd yelled like a teenager, holding up his hand for a high five. Georg Wilhelm Steller, Alaska's first naturalist, once wrote that he had fallen in love with nature. I couldn't help but think that Vernon Byrd had done the same. Steller had no inkling of things to come. Many of the animals he discovered on the expedition and described with such joy are now either extinct, endangered, threatened, or depleted. The future of those remaining now rests in the hands of scientists like Byrd-and our own. Sidebar A sea otter cradles her pup off Adak Island. Hunted to near extinction by 1911, sea otters rebounded in the Aleutians until the 1980s. Since then their numbers have fallen 75 percent, one of the sharpest wildlife declines in recent history Harbor reminds visitors of World War II battles fought on U.S. soil, the 15-month campaign to retake Attu and Kiska from the Japanese. Aleutian bases formed part of the Ice Curtain of the Cold War, a hot spot of nuclear brinkmanship. Legacy of Wildlife and War With some 2,500 islands, cliffs, and rocky spires dotting Alaska's vast coastline, the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge is transcontinental in scale. Each year millions of seabirds and thousands of marine mammals return to these craggy shores to raise their young. Most of the refuge is gale-whipped wilderness rarely glimpsed by humans. But human impacts have been profound, from the introduction of foxes and rats, to overfishing and pollution from military bases. Land included in Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge Alaska Maritime N.W.R. includes some public and private land holdings. Scale varies in this perspective. Distance from Attu Island to Dutch Harbor is 845 miles (1,360 kilometers). DIGITAL ELEVATION DATA BY U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC MAPS Sidebar A Steller sea lion bellows its trademark in western Alaska waters since the 1970s. Most environmentalists blame overfishing, while most fishermen blame everything else. Sidebar WEBSITE EXCLUSIVE Find more images and field notes on the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge and its human and wildlife inhabitants at nationalgeo graphic.com/ngm/0308. Author Affiliation JOEL K. BOURNE, JR. ASSISTANT ED1TOR //
rocket for the rest of us // The creator of SpaceShipOne says private space flight's about to take off. At the dawn of a new era, SpaceShipOne is minutes away from being released by its launch aircraft. White Knight, on September 29,2004. With pilot Mike Melvill at the controls, the pioneering civilian rocket would climb to more than 62 miles (100 kilometers) in the first of two flights to win a ten-million-dollar prize. To me this would be the fulfillment of a childhood dream. Just before sunrise on October 4, as the launch vehicle White Knight-with SpaceShipOne tucked neatly under its belly-was poised to taxi onto the runway at Mojave Airport in California, I stuck my head inside the tiny graphite-and-epoxy rocket to give pilot Brian Binnie a few last words of advice. I knew that Brian, an avid golfer like me, would get my meaning. "Use a driver," I said. "Keep your head down and swing smooth." My message: Shoot for the greatest possible performance, but also strive for accuracy. Brian qualify SpaceShipOne for the ten-million-dollar Ansari X Prize, he had to fly himself and the equivalent of two passengers-a total of 595 pounds-to an altitude of at least 100 kilometers (328,000 feet) and return for a safe landing. We'd measured his payload precisely. But nobody had planned on Brian's mother-in-law contributing a last-minute surprise. As Brian got ready to enter the cockpit, she gave him a big hug, spilling a cup of coffee all over his flight suit. "I got soaked," Brian said. "I later figured those extra 12 ounces probably cost me 200 feet of apogee." We were used to surprises by then. Five days before, test pilot Mike Melvill had taken SpaceShipOne to more than 337,500 feet-the first of the two suborbital spaceflights required within two weeks to win the X Prize. But as Mike had rocketed toward the edge of space, SpaceShipOne had started spinning at an alarming rate. Mike was never in any danger, but the unexpected rolls left us scratching our got much sleep. We eventually hypothesized that the rolls were caused by a lack of directional stability as the rocket left the atmosphere. Mike may also have been pushing a little too hard on the rudder pedal. The incident led me to ask if I might be pushing too hard as well. I gathered the team together 48 hours after Mike's flight to see if they were ready to try again. Their response: a wholehearted yes. As the designer of both SpaceShipOne and White Knight, I had a lot riding on our team's success. Not only did I hope to bring home the X Prize, I also wanted us to prove that privately built spaceships could achieve what the U.S. government has not: develop technology to make spaceflight affordable and safe for the masses. To me this would be the fulfillment of a childhood dream. I was 14 years old when Sputnik was launched into orbit, and I convinced myself, naively, that the space race would one day punch my personal ticket I too would be able to hop aboard a spacecraft and rocket into orbit, even vacation on the moon. By the mid-1990s, however, I'd realized that waiting for NASA wasn't going to work. The government's attempts to reduce the cost of space access had led to billions of dollars being spent on design studies and a few research craft. If my dream was going to come true-of floating weightless in the black sky and being thrilled by the sight of Earth from outside our atmosphere-I'd have to get things started myself. I was encouraged to do this by the history of aircraft design itself. Five years after the Wright brothers' first flight, in 1903, the airplane was still just a dangerous curiosity. Only a dozen or so people had ventured into the air. Yet by 1912 hundreds of pilots had flown a number of different designs developed around the world, with crashes weeding out the bad ideas. Soon factories in France, England, and Germany were producing hundreds, and I believe the answer lay in two observations: "That's got ta be fun" and "maybe I can do that." Clearly, if private spaceships were going to be built, they would also need to be created for fun by those discovering that "maybe I can do that." My theory was about to be tested as I stood inside our mission control room at Mojave Airport. By now White Knight had carried SpaceShipOne to its launch altitude of 47,100 feet. The moment of truth was at hand. Inside White Knight, flight engineer Matt Stinemetze released SpaceShipOne from its hooks, and Brian Binnie, inside the smaller rocket ship, called out "arm and fire." The motor ignited and 18,000 pounds of thrust threw Brian back in his seat at three times the force of gravity. In about ten seconds he broke the sound barrier and began a steep climb that would take him into the record books: Not only did he fly smooth and true, he also broke the North American X-15. And he broke it by 13,000 feet! Brian topped it all off with a picture-perfect landing at Mojave Airport 24 minutes after he had ignited SpaceShipOne's rocket engine. Winning the X Prize didn't mark the end of our fairy tale; it was merely a very good beginning. I'm committed to continuing research into suborbital flight to ensure that it can be done far more safely than any past manned system. Affordability is necessary too, so that many thousands can fly, not just ten or so astronauts or cosmonauts a year. I know this will be a challenge; we need major technological breakthroughs to make such visions come true. But the same could have been said of SpaceShipOne a few years ago-and look at how far we've come. Already, Richard Branson, head of the Virgin Group, has announced that he will license the SpaceShipOne technology from investor Paul Alien, who has financed my endeavor all along. Branson is investing about a hundred million dollars to create the, Scaled Composites, will work under contract to Virgin to build the first few spaceships, which may begin commercial operations by the end of the decade. And guess who will be on that first commercial flight? Yours truly. But we won't stop there. Branson has stated that he plans to reinvest his Virgin Galactic profits to continue funding research that will result in new flight systems that could take people to orbiting hotels or a lunar landing base. And guess who will be on one of those flights? You. Or perhaps your children. If you're a space dreamer like me, then believe it when I say that you're waking up to find that it's really happening. IN THE PILOT'S SEAT Enjoy a 360-degree view from inside the cockpit of SpaceShipOne, then join our Forum on the future of space flight and cast your vote on whether you'll be able to visit space yourself at **36;1514;TOOLONG. Spectators Nikki LeFebvre and Kathryn Kightlinger (left) spy the streaking rocket during its plane curves right. Later, the team salutes the crowd in front of SpaceShipOne with a flag carried aboard the historic flight. Winning the X Prize was merely a very good beginning. Sidebar Burt Rutan shows off his hot rod spaceship at his workshop in Mojave, California, where pilot Brian Binnie (below) weighs in before the October 4 flight. Binnie and Melvill wore the same lucky charm (below left) on their flight suits. Sidebar How to build a better spaceship Feathered position Glide position High drag By rotating both tails and a third of the wing 65 degrees into a "feathered" position-like a badminton shuttlecock-the spacecraft increases drag, which slows its descent, prevents overheating, and increases stability for a "carefree" reentry. Nitrous oxide tank Solid rubber propellent 2 The motor burns for some 90 seconds; the spacecraft climbs steeply as it accelerates to three times the speed of sound. 3 At an altitude of 213,000 feet, the pilot shuts off the rocket motor and swings the tail booms coasts to apogee-its highest point-at around 367,500 feet, and the pilot experiences weightlessness for about three minutes. 328,000 feet: the edge of space 5 Tail booms, still in the feathered position, provide stability as the spacecraft reenters the atmosphere belly first. The pilot is pressed into his seat with a force 5.4 times that of his own weight. Cheap thrust Combining the best features of liquid fuel (nitrous oxide) and solid fuel (synthetic rubber), Rutan's company, Scaled Composites, created a safe, inexpensive rocket engine that can be turned off when necessary and changed out in less than a day. Hitching a ride Just as the X-15 rocket plane was carried aloft by a modified B-52 in the 1980s SpaceShipOne gets a lift from White Knight, reducing both the risks of a runway takeoff and the amount of fuel required to reach space. 1 October 4, 2004 7:49 AM PDT White Knight releases SpaceshipOne at 47,100 feet. Seconds later, the pilot fires the rocket motor. 2,791 feet Mojave positions at 51,000 feet, and SpaceShipOne glides back to Mojave Airport. //
STYLISH PERFORMER: The new Maxum 3000 Sun Cruiser, not-so-little sister of the flagship 4100 SCR, emulates its sibling. Photograph CHIC AND ROOMY: The 30's galley, dinette and forward berth. // You could call it a best-of-both-worlds boat. The new Maxum 3000 Sun Cruiser-the not-so-little sister of the 4100 SCR opposite-offers many of its sibling's yacht-like features, including a surprising amount of living space for its size. It emulates the 41's stylish looks, elegant appointments, luxurious amenities, nice ride, quality construction and long list of standard itemswhile also boasting the speed and agility of a sportboat. In short, it packs a lot of bang for the buck. I boarded the 30 through the port-side transom door from the integrated swim platform with retractable ladder, noting that there's a convenient molded boarding step from the side-deck as well. A pair of transom lockers hold the boat's standard dockside power cord, fenders and transom shower. The large cockpit's centerfacing U-lounge with removable table seats four to six people and converts to a sun lounge with flip-up seat that opens to a locker holding a standard portable cooler. To port is a wet bar with attractive Avonite countertop, molded sink, storage cabinets, and adjacent row of beverage holders. All the outdoor seating, most of which has storage underneath, is upholstered in 30ounce marine-grade vinyl. A snap-in carpet, Bimini top and camper enclosure are standard. The boat's roomy stepin engine compartment, under a hatch on gas struts, has space to add an optional generator and air conditioner. The 30's double-wide helm seat with adjustable driver's side provides great visibility and convenient reach to the mahogany/burlwood tilt wheel and righthand engine controls with drive-trim thumb switches, linked to trim indicators on the dash. The sporty-looking nonglare two-tiered dashboard features simulated-burlwood panels with easy-to-read gauges and rubber rocker systems switches arrayed in two neat rows. A Horizon VHF, Lowrance depthfinder, Danforth compass and Bennett trim tabs are all standard. Photograph SPORTY LOOK: The 30's helm. // Getting to the foredeck is easy, via the molded step. The integrated bow pulpit has a recessed anchoring platform with anchor roller, and there's a double sunpad on the foredeck. The boat's bowand grabrails, as well as deck fittings, are all stainless steel and are throughbolted with backing plates. Elegantly appointed A port-side hatch leads to the elegantly appointed cabin, which has an extremely generous amount of space and headroom for a 30-footer. Plenty of light and air flow from three overhead hatches and six portlights, all screened, as well as numerous light fixtures. The impression of roominess is further enhanced by the openness of the layout and the cleverly angled forward berth and dinette areas. There are sleeping accommodations for six people-on the UltraLeather convertible dinette with removable Avonite-topped table; on the convertible mid-cabin U-lounge with removable table and accordion privacy door; and in the forward berth area, with accordion privacy door and shelf for an optional TV. A four-speaker stereo system is standard. Under-seat and underberth storage is plentiful throughout. On the port side is a sink, pressure hot/cold water, microwave oven, two-burner Origo alcohol/electric stovetop, Norcold dual-voltage refrigerator/freezer, trashbag dispenser and plentiful storage. The molded-fiberglass head, aft of the dinette, includes an MSD, shower with curtain, molded sink and mirrored cabinet. When powered by a pair of 220-hp 5.7L EFI MerCruisers with Alpha One drives (a popular alternative, for an extra $11,600, to the standard single 300-hp 7.4L Merc), the 3000 has a reported cruising speed of 36 mph and a top end of 44 to 47 mph. The boat's 18-degree transom deadrise helps ensure a smooth ride in choppy seas. Like its siblings, the 3000 features a patented MaxuPlane hull with highquality hand-laid fiberglass construction under a flawless gelcoat, and comes with a transferable five-year structural hull limited warranty-and it's a great value. -POLLY WHITTELL // Maxum 3000 SCR //
The 100-mph Cobra 357 Sea Viper is so fast it alters time and shrinks the Bahamas to half their size. Photograph Photograph Photograph POWER TO SPARE 300-hp Mercury outboards pack 100-mph potential. // Forty-eight minutes!" I shouted. We'd just reached Haulover Inlet on Florida's Miami coastline, and my left hand was still tightly wrapped around the wheel as I checked my watch and announced the time. "That's got ta be a record for a fishing boat," Peter Casini shouted back, his hand raised for a resounding high five. Without a doubt. No fishing boat has ever made it from Bimini to Miami-almost 55 miles-in 48 minutes. But, far more amazing than the time itself was the fact that we weren't really pushing it. If we had been, we might have made it in 40 minutes! Most fishing boats are significantly less than halfway along the rhumb line after 40 minutes. So, why is this fishing boat so much faster than all the rest? Well, to call it a fishing boat is only half. A somewhat different version -- the Cobra 357 Super Viper-won the 1997 Key West World Championships. The Cobra we crossed the Gulf Stream in-the 357 Sea Viper-has every requisite fishing feature to qualify it for inclusion in the outboard sportfishing category. It's definitely a fishing boat-and a diving boat, and a freedom-ofexpression boat, and an outrageously fast speedboat that shrinks time and space in awesome fashion. It transforms trips to and between islands in the Bahamas from a matter of hours to a matter of minutes. After all, it can hit 100 mph. At least it can with the power package Cobra President Peter Casini had hung on the transom of this custom-painted (a trip in itself) missile for our trip to Bimini: three 300-hp Mercury Pro Max outboards, black monster machines that looked as if they'd come off Formula One racers, but that are actually stock engines whose only special requirements are 92-octane gas and a fondness for the exhaust rumble of pit row. "Breakfast in Bimini" is a fishermen. North Bimini, the legendary sliver of land due east of Miami, where Hemingway and a handful of other anglers and captains put the "sport" in big-game sportfishing, has a so-near-and-yet-so-far aspect that puts it just out of range of most weekend fishermen-unless they're satisfied with a couple of half-days. But, we'd make the fantasy a reality. We'd cross the Stream, clear customs, eat breakfast, and be out trolling by mid-morning. At least, that's what we thought. Five of us, including Cobra's Scott Franzoni and Casini himself, set out from Haulover at 7:30 a.m. and pointed the Cobra's wide bow toward Bimini. But, it soon became clear that our 60-mph pace would be too punishing to maintain. Photograph // The Cobra is a catamaran-it has twin sponsons that trap air to create a "cushion." But not in six-to-eight-foot seas, which is what we encountered as we neared the Gulf Stream. In calm conditions, the Cobra skims across the sea only 17 inches of water. The only wetted surfaces are its two "pads," nineinch-wide flat sections on the bottom of its twin hulls that enable the boat to plane immediately (and stay on plane at only 15 mph) with no bow rise. At over 40 mph, the Cobra rides on only the after two or three feet of these pads, which means it has less bottom in the water than an eight-foot dinghy. The rest of the 36-foot-long hull is airborne. In rough headseas, however, you have to slow way down or the Cobra will fly over some waves, but right into the faces of others. Its Kevlar hull can take the pounding. The passengers, however, can not. A late breakfast So, no records were broken on our run to Bimini. We reached the Bimini Big Game Club dock by 9 a.m., having averaged only a bit over 20 mph. By noon we'd unpacked, cleared customs and immigration and had breakfast with Club Manager Curtis south on the center engine for wahoo, using downriggers and planers to keep the lures deep. We had a few hits, but only landed some barracuda. The Cobra is incredibly stable. Even with all five of us on one side of the boat, it barely listed. It's also huge. The aerodynamic console/front seat hinges up for access to the (portable or optional marine) head, and to the impeccable wiring, to the back of the dash, and to a massive amount of storage space. Up front, the wide cuddy cabin houses a raised double berth to port of the entrance. The most impressive dimension on the Sea Viper is the amount of deck space. Because it's a cat (with a 9' 10" beam), its bow is wide. In warship terms, it's analogous to an aircraft carrier, while a monohull is more like a battleship. The wide bow affords an oversize (90-sq. ft.), unobstructed, non-skid casting platform/sunlounge (a. (With the fold-up aft bench in place, seating capacity is 12!) Fishing space is enormous-both forward and aft of the console as well as on either side. Four in-sole boxes will accommodate water skis, etc., and can be plumbed for additional livewells. Everything drains overboard, including the full-width fish box under the forward bench. To round out the fishing features, there are Rupp outriggers, a transom bait-rigging center, a rocket launcher/leaning post with tackle drawers and a 40-gallon livewell, plus rod holders (and cup holders) everywhere. The radar arch incorporates a Bimini-style extension for shade. Our anglers included two novice snorkelers who wanted to explore a Bahamas reef. We finished trolling off Cat Cay, but I headed for the rocks off the old Rockwell Mansion north of Bimini's pines. Good place for a first snorkel. It was 15 miles away. We made it in 12 minutes. The next day we chummed for yellowtail off Ocean Cay and did some diving at Riding Rocks, the dock in less than half an hour. In effect, a boat like this compresses the Bahamas, or any other cruising area, from a football field into a children's playground. Bimini to Freeport in less than an hour! As long as it's calm, you can blast between islands or island groups at freeway speeds. And it is a blast. Coming home, we had only a twofoot swell-perfect conditions for 5000rpm (70 mph/55 gph) operation... and for setting a fishing boat record between Bimini and Florida. The batch of 89 octane gas we picked up in Bimini kept us from going faster (under 92 risks piston damage). The stiff three-engine steering system is an advantage for keeping on an arrow-straight course at this speed. When the boat briefly becomes airborne it's necessary to instantly pull back the three Gaffrig throttles and then quickly push them forward to avoid cavitation. You have your hands full. This three-300-hp version is the ultimate go-fast Cobra. Finely tweaked and perfectly propped rpm and cruise at 72 mph. There are more civilized versions that are less demanding. I'd rather have the twin 250-Yamaha Sea Viper with a cruise speed of 50 mph at 4500 rpm (37-38 gph). Top speed is only 72 mph, but you don't have to wear headsets and microphones to communicate with the person next to you. On the other hand, if you love speed and fishing equally, as Peter Casini does, and can't decide whether to go racing or trolling, the 100-mph Cobra may be for you. It's the only boat that can do both. // Cobra 357 Sea Viper //
Picturesque Somes Sound, which neatly bisects Mt. Desert Island and has a well-protected harbor at its north end, is one of Maine's most coveted cruising destinations. It was in these beautiful granite-and-pine surroundings that I had an opportunity to run hull number one of the new MJM 34Z. This is the first powerboat from Bob Johnstone, who is a founder and president of J-Boats, a successful family of sailboats. This Downeast cruiser with its striking, traditional style came off the drawing board of naval architect Doug Zurn, but it was named for someone close to Johnstone's heart, his wife, Mary. MJM is an unofficial acronym for Mary Johnstone's Motorboat, and it will please those who have a penchant for sweet lines and an elegant tumblehome. This boat is intended for day trips, weekend cruises and longer vacations. It's targeted for those who are downsizing from either a power or sailboat, particularly those who want the convenience of a smaller craft that doesn't take half a day's prep to leave the dock. The layout is's a U-shaped dinette with a table that drops down to form a king-size berth. Across from it is an entertainment center that includes a 22-inch flat-screen TV with DVD-player and Sirius-ready Clarion stereo. The standard Freedom 30 inverter and optional generator supply 120-volt A.C. power for the entertainment center, air conditioner, microwave and electric cooktop. The Seafrost top-loading refrigerator, adopted from sailboat designs, is 12-volt D.C.-powered. An enclosed head compartment with shower is also included. In the pilothouse, there's 6' 6" of headroom at the helm. What I like most about this area is the design of the side "windows." They are taller than usual, and create an open feel in the pilothouse. The windows are fitted with Strataglass coverings that can be rolled up when you need more ventilation, or snapped down for protection from spray and rain. Steps on either side of the cockpit lead to the sidedecks, which are covered with nonskid. Ample grabrails make it easy for you to go forward. they are mounted up on the hardtop, along with antennas for the radar, GPS and satellite radio. A low-profile windlass and 316 stainless steel bowsprit contain the chromed Lewmar claw anchor. Though the style of the 34Z is definitely eye-catching, and the interior features well thought out, it's the construction and drivetrain system that I found most notable. The hull, built by Boston Boatworks, is a modified-V design with a sharp entry and noticeable bow flare, plus dual lifting strakes, chine flats and an 18-degree deadrise at the transom. The prop pockets allow for an eight-degree angle on the shaft, which makes for better efficiency along with excellent shoal draft. The hull is a post-oven-cured, high-tech composite of epoxy-impregnated E-glass and Kevlar-cored vacuum laminate. It's one reason the entire boat weighs less than 11,000 pounds with a full load. A solid fiberglass centerline keel and chines with structural grid will minimize the effects of a grounding. The test boat was equipped with a single 440-hp Yanmar diesel inboard. According to a speed of 23.5 knots at about 2400 rpm, where it will burn 12 gph and yield a range of approximately 264.4 nautical miles (assuming a 10-percent fuel reserve). Thanks to a beam that's almost 11 feet, the 34Z offers a smooth ride. When I ran Mary Johnstone's Motorboat, I thought the experience felt more like flying. The response from the stainless destroyer wheel was immediate, and the boat gently banked in turns. On the straightaway, it tracked true, even when I took my hands off the wheel. This single-screw boat will pivot 360 degrees within its own length, and close-quarters maneuvering is no problem, as I found out when backing out of the Northeast Harbor Marina. But the best feature of this hull is its dryness. With 20-knot winds charging down the sound from the north, we took no water on board, not even spray. Aside from the pilothouse model I tested, the 34Z also is available as an express version with a soft top out there. The selection of equipment offered with the boat is impressive and of the highest quality; it reflects the builder's and the designer's years of cruising experience. The list of standard items even includes a full complement of electronics. This is truly a turnkey craft with sensational looks. MJM's new 34Z is one of the most imaginative boats I have seen in quite a while. Specifications: LOA Table
. Lying alone in the Atlantic swells, this stranded piece of Rhode Island has become a favorite stop for well-traveled boaters. IF FIRST IMPRESSIONS ARE THE DEEPEST, THEN IT'S NO wonder Block Island resides securely in the heart and memory of many a mariner. Whether it's the stunning sight of Mohegan Bluffs as you approach from the south, the lonely outpost of North Light or the broad embrace of the Great Salt Pond, fetching Block Island the first time is unforgettable. Once you've made landfall, it's hard not to be enchanted by the history, natural beauty, 17 miles of beaches, breathtaking views of the sea from atop 200-foot cliffs, great food and lovely architecture. Its location -- about 22 nautical miles from Newport, 14 from Point Judith and 18 from Montauk Point -- adds to its allure. Block Island is just far enough away to be distinctly its own world, yet close enough to be convenient. Most boaters stay in the Great Salt Pond, or New Harbor, a 625-acre bay that opens through a narrow channel 14 feet, but you can expect a three- to four-knot current during the tidal peaks. Once inside, you may tie up at Champlin's Marina, Block Island Boat Basin or Payne's Dock -- all toward the Pond's eastern end. The town of New Shoreham maintains 90 first-come, first-served moorings from Memorial to Columbus days, and there's an anchorage to the east. Between Champlin's and the Boat Basin, there's a long crescent of beach to land a dinghy. All Rhode Island waters are no-discharge zones, and three boats are available for free pump-outs (hail on Channel 73). If you see a small boat buzzing around offering fresh-baked goods, don't hesitate to hail it, as well. Aldo's Bakery has been treating boating visitors to fresh pies, muffins and goodies for years, and it's a delectable way to start the day. On the island's eastern side, Old Harbor is the heart of the "downtown" and a National Historic District. It R.I, and New London, Conn., but has limited town dockage (stern-to the bulkhead and rafted off) and a tiny anchorage. Ballard's Wharf at the well-known beachfront Ballard's Inn has eight new slips for transients. Without question, the best way to see Block Island is by bicycle. Rental shops are all over the place. From the saddle of a bicycle, you'll hear the shush of breeze over the high, stone-walled meadows, the crash of waves on the rocks and beaches below, and the huge variety of songbirds. Block Island has 25 miles of walking trails through greenways and nature preserves and approximately 365 ponds. A gorgeous morning is a bike ride to Rodman's Hollow, followed by a walk through this glacial out-wash to the edge of high cliffs and Black Rock Beach below. Ride back to town for lunch, then bike to the quieter north end and see Settler's Rock, which marks where the first English settlers landed in 1661. On the way back, can take in Block Island in a day, but you'll certainly want it to last longer. BOX WHERE TO STAY In the Great Salt Pond (New Harbor): Champlln's Marina, (401) 466-2641, www.champlinsresort.com; Block Island Boat Basin, (401) 466-2631; Payne's Dock, (401) 466-5572, harbormaster on Channel 12. In Old Harbor: Old Harbor Town Dock, Channel 12; Ballard's Wharf, (401) 466-2231. For more information: www.blockisland.com; **26;2374;TOOLONG; and www.blockislandguide.com. BOX COPING WITH FOG The foggiest month is June, says Chris Willi, Block Island's harbormaster. Sometimes the island may be clear but the fog bank is offshore, other times fog shrouds Block Island. The best way to deal with fog is to have radar, GPS, a chartplotter and the experience to know how to use them. "We have 22 ferries entering Old Harbor daily," Willi says, "and the boat traffic around the island is pretty high shouldn't be out there." Charter Captain Denny Dillon agrees and says at the very least every boat should have a radar reflector onboard "to make yourself visible." If you get caught in fog, sound your foghorn regularly and reduce your speed. Finally, don't box yourself in to having to leave on a particular day. "What I tell people is, if the weather's bad, do you really need to leave?" Willi says. "There are worse places to be stuck." PULLQUOTE Its location-about 22 nautical miles from Newport and 18 from Montauk-adds to its allure. Block Island is far enough away to be its own world, yet close enough to be convenient. Author Affiliation
He's super rich, a Godfather-tobe, and powerless over his love for luminous movie star Athena Aquitane. BY MARIO PUZO // A week after the death of Athena's violent, vengeful ex-husband, Boz Skannet, Cross De Lena received a dinner invitation to Athena Aquitane's house in Malibu through his sister Claudia. Cross flew from Vegas to Los Angeles, rented a car, and arrived at the Malibu Colony guarded gatehouse as the sun began to fall into the ocean. There was no longer any special security, as there had been when Boz was threatening Athena's life, though there was still the secretary in the guest house who checked and buzzed him in. He walked through the longitudinal garden to the house on the beach. There was still the little South American maid, who led him to the sea green living room that seemed just out of reach of the Pacific Ocean waves. Athena was waiting for him, and she was even more beautiful than he remembered. She was dressed in a pale green blouse and slacks, and she seemed ocean behind her. He could not take his eyes off her. She shook his hand in greeting, not the usual Hollywood kiss on both cheeks. She had drinks ready, and she handed him one. It was Evian water with lime. They sat in the large mint green upholstered chairs that faced the ocean. The descending sun scattered gold coins of light in the room. Cross was so aware of her beauty that he had to bow his head to avoid looking at her. The golden helmet of hair, the creamy skin, the way her long body sprawled in her chair. Some of the gold coins fell into her green eyes, fleeting shadows. He felt an urgent desire to touch her, to be closer to her, to own her. Athena seemed unaware of the emotions she was causing. She sipped her drink and said quietly, "I wanted to thank you for keeping me in the movie business. Boz had me so terrified, I never would have returned to voice further entranced Cross. It was not sultry or inviting. But it had such a velvet tone and regal confidence, yet it was so warm that he just wanted her to keep talking. Jesus Christ, he thought, what the hell is this? He was ashamed of her power over him. His head still down, he murmured, "I thought I could get you back to work by appealing to your greed." "That is not one of my many weaknesses," Athena said. Now she turned her head from the ocean so that she could look directly into his eyes. "Your sister Claudia told me the studio reneged on their deal with you to become a producer once my former husband killed himself. You had to give them back the picture and settle for a percentage." Cross kept his face impassive. He hoped to banish everything he was feeling about her. "I guess I'm not a very good businessman," he said. He wanted to Molly Flanders wrote your contract," Athena said. "She's the best lawyer in Hollywood. You could have held on." Cross shrugged. "A matter of politics. I wanted to get into the movie business permanently but didn't want enemies as powerful as LoddStone Studios." "I could help you," Athena said. "I could refuse to return to the picture." Cross felt a thrill that she would do that for him. He considered the offer. The studio might still take him to court, and he had too many Mafia connections to hide for that. Also, he could not bear to be in Athena's debt. And then it occurred to him that although Athena was beautiful, that didn't mean she was not clever. "Why would you do that?" he asked. Athena got up from her chair and moved to stand close to the picture window. The beaches were gray shadows, the sun had disappeared, and the ocean the Pacific Coast Highway. She gazed out toward the now blueblack water, the small waves rippling slyly. She did not turn her head to him when she said, "Why would I do that? Simply because I knew Boz Skannet better than anybody. And I don't care if he left a hundred suicide notes; he would never kill himself." Cross shrugged. "Dead is dead," he said. "That's true," Athena said. She turned to face him, looked directly at him. "You buy the picture because LoddStone wants out since I refuse to be in it anymore. Then suddenly Boz commits suicide. You're my candidate as the killer." Even stern, her face was so beautiful to Cross that his voice was not as steady as he would have wished. "How about the studio?" Cross said. Athena shook her head. "They understood what I was asking. Just as you did. I would never have been didn't want to get involved with murder so they sold the picture to you. They didn't care if I was killed after the picture was finished, but you did. And I knew you would help me even when you said you couldn't. When I heard about your buying the picture, I knew exactly what you would do, but I must say I didn't think you could do it so cleverly." Suddenly, she came toward him, and he rose from his chair, took her hands in his. He could smell her body, her breath. Athena said, "That was the only evil thing I have ever done in my life. Making somebody commit murder. It was terrible. I would have been a much better person if I had done it myself. But I couldn't." Cross said, "Why were you so sure I would do something?" Athena said, "Your sister told me so much about you. I understood who still hasn't caught on about your 'connections.' She thinks you're just a tough guy with a lot of clout." Cross became very alert. She was trying to get him to admit guilt. Something he would never do even to a priest, not even to himself. Athena said, "And the way you looked at me. A lot of men looked at me that way. I'm not being immodest; I know I'm beautiful, people have been telling me that since I was a child. I always knew I had power, but I could never really understand it. I'm not really happy with it, but I use itwhat they call love." Cross let go of her hands. "Why were you so afraid of your husband? Because he could ruin your career?" For one moment, there was a flash of anger in her eyes. "It wasn't my career," she said, "and it wasn't out. I had a better reason." She paused, then said, "I can make them give you the picture back. I understand why you didn't want to go to court when they took it back from you. You wanted to protect those connections. "But I can get the movie back for you by simply refusing to be in it again." "No," Cross said. Athena smiled and said with a brilliant, gay cheerfulness, "Then we can just go to bed together. I find you very attractive, and I'm sure we'll have a rood time." His first reaction was one of anger, that she would think she could just buy him off. That she was acting a part, using her skill as a woman the same way a man would use physical force. But what really bothered him was that he could hear a faint bit of mockery in her voice: mockery of his gallantry, turning his true love into a simple love for her was as fake as her love for him. He said to her coolly, "I had a long talk with Boz, trying to make a deal. He said he used to f -- you five times a day when you were married." He was pleased that she seemed startled. She said, "I wasn't counting, but it was a lot. I was eighteen, and I really loved him. Isn't it funny that now I wanted him dead?" She frowned a moment and said casually, "What else did you talk about?" Cross looked at her grimly. "Boz told me the terrible secret you had between you. He claims you confessed that when you ran away, you buried your baby in the desert." Athena's face became a mask. Her green eyes went dull. For the first time that night, Cross felt she could not possibly be acting. Her face had a pallor no actress could achieve. She murdered my baby?" "Boz said that's what you told him," Cross said. "I did tell him that," Athena said. "Now, I'm asking you again. Do you believe I murdered my baby?" There is nothing so terrible as to condemn a beautiful woman. Cross knew that if he answered truthfully, he would lose her forever. Suddenly, he put his arms around her very gently. "You're too beautiful. Nobody as beautiful as you could do that." Men's eternal worship of beauty against all evidence. "No," he said. "I don't believe you did." She stepped away from him. "Even though I'm responsible for Boz's death?" "You're not responsible," Cross said. "He killed himself." Athena was gazing at him intently. He took her hands. "Do you believe I killed Boz?" he asked. And then Athena smiled,. "No more than you believe I killed my baby." They smiled; they had declared each other innocent. She took his hand and said, "Now, I'm cooking dinner for you, and then we're going to bed." She led him into the kitchen. Hou many times had she played this scene? Cross thought jealously. The beautiful queen performing housewifely duties like an ordinary woman. He watched her cook. She wore no protective clothing, and she was extraordinarily professional. She spoke to him as she chopped vegetables, prepared a skillet, and set the table. She gave him a bottle of wine to open, holding his hand and brushing against his body. She saw him looking with admiration when the table was laden after just a half hour. She said, "I played a female chef in one of my first roles, so I went to school to get everything right. And one critic wrote, When Athena Aquitane acts as well as she They ate in the alcove of the kitchen so they could look at the rolling ocean. The food was delicious, little squares of beef covered with vegetables and then a salad of bitter greens. There was a platter of cheeses and warm short loaves of bread, plump as pigeons. Then there was espresso with a small, light lemon tart." You should have been a cook," Cross said. "My cousin Vincent would hire you for his restaurants any day." "Oh, I could have been anything," Athena said with mock boastfulness. All through dinner, she had touched him casually in a way that was sexual, as if she were searching for some spirit in his flesh. With every touch, Cross yearned to feel her body on his. By the end of the meal, he no longer could taste what he was eating. Finally, they were done, and Athena took him by the hand and led him out of the kitchen and up the two gracefully, almost shyly, almost blushing, as if she were an eager, virginal bride. Cross marveled at her acting ability. The large bedroom was at the very top of the house and had a small balcony that looked out over the ocean. The walls were covered with weird, garish paintings that seemed to light up the room. They stood on the balcony and watched the room illuminate the beach sand with a spooky yellow glow, the other Malibu houses squatted along the water showing little boxes of light. Tiny birds, as if playing a game, ran in and out of the incoming waves to escape getting wet. Athena put her hand on Cross's shoulder, around his body, the other hand reaching out to pull his mouth down to hers. They kissed for a long time as the warm ocean air washed over them. Then Athena led him inside the bedroom. She undressed quickly, slipping out of her pale green blouse and slacks. Her white body flashed in the moonridden. The rising breasts with their raspberry nipples seemed spun of sugar. Her long legs, the curve of her hips, the blonde hair at her crotch, her absolute stillness, limned by misty ocean air. Cross reached out for her body, and her flesh was velvet, her lips filled with the scent of flowers. The sheer joy of touching her was so sweet, he could not do anything else. Athena began to undress him. She did so gently, running her hands over his body as he had over hers. Then, kissing him, she gently pulled him onto the bed. Cross made love with a passion he had never known or even dreamed existed. He was so urgent that Athena had to stroke his face to gentle him. He could not let loose of her body, even after they climaxed. They lay intertwined until they began again. She was even more ardent than before, as if it was some sort of contest, some sort of avowal. Finally just as the sun showed above the horizon. For the first time in his life, he had a headache. Naked, he moved onto the balcony and sat on one of the straw chairs. He watched the sun slyly rise slowly from the ocean and begin its ascent to the sky. She was a dangerous woman: the murderer of her own child, whose bones were now filled with desert sand. And she was too skillful in bed. She could be the end of him. At that moment, he decided he would never see her again. Then he felt her arms around his neck, and his face twisted around to kiss her. She was in a fluffy white bathrobe, and her hair was held in place by pins that glittered like jewels in a crown. "Take a shower, and I'll make you breakfast before you go," she said. She led him into the double bathroom: two sinks, two marble counters, two bathtubs, and two showers razors, shaving cream, skin toners, brushes, and combs. When he had finished and was out on the balcony again, Athena brought a tray with croissants, coffee, and orange juice to the table. "I can make you bacon and eggs," she said. "This is fine," Cross said. "When will I see you again?" Athena asked. "I have lots of things to do in Las Vegas," Cross said. "I'll call you next week." Athena gave him an appraising look. "That means good-bye, doesn't it?" she asked. "And I really enjoyed last night." Cross shrugged. "You paid off your obligation," he said. She gave him a good-humored grin and said, "And with amazing goodwill, don't you think? It wasn't begrudging." Cross laughed. "No," he said. She seemed to read his mind. Last night, they lies had no power. She seemed to know that her beauty was too much for him to trust. That he felt in danger with Athena and her confessed sins. She seemed deep in thought and ate silently. Then she said to him, "I know you're busy, but I have something to show you. Can you spare this morning and catch an afternoon plane? It's important. I want to take you someplace." Cross could not resist spending one last time with her, and so he said yes. Athena drove them in her car, a Mercedes SL 300, and took the highway south to San Diego. But just before they reached the city, she turned off onto a thin road that led inland through the mountains. In fifteen minutes, they came to a compound enclosed by barbed wire. Inside the compound were six red brick buildings separated by green lawns and connected by sky blue-painted walkways. In one of the green squares, a group of about twenty green, about ten children were flying kites. There was a group of three or four adults standing around watching them, but something seemed odd about the scene. When the soccer ball flew through the air, it seemed most of the children ran away from it, while on the other square, the kites flew up, up, into the sky and never returned. "What is this place?" Cross asked. Athena looked pleadingly at him. "Just come with me, please, for now. Later, you can ask your questions." Athena drove to the entry gate and showed a gold ID badge to the security guard. Passing through, she drove to the largest building and parked. Once inside at the reception desk, Athena asked the attendant something in a low voice. Cross stood back, but he still heard the answer. "She was in a mood, so we gave her a hug in her room." "What the hell was that?" took his hand and led him through a long, shiny tile hallway to an adjoining building and into some sort of dormitory. A nurse sitting at the entrance asked their names. When she nodded, Athena led Cross down another long hallway of doors. Finally, she opened one. They were standing in a pretty bedroom, large and full of light. There were the same strange, dark paintings as on the walls in Athena's bedroom, but here they were strewn on the floor. On the wall, a small shelf held a row of pretty dolls dressed in starched Amish costumes. Also on the floor were several other scraps of drawings and paintings. There was a small bed covered with a fuzzy pink blanket, the pillows white with red roses stitched all over them. But there was no child in the bed. Athena walked toward a large box that was open at the top, its walls and base covered with a thick, soft pad colored light blue, and when Cross looked didn't notice them. She was fiddling with a knob at the head of the box, and Cross watched as she forced the pads together, almost crushing herself. She was a small girl of ten, a tiny copy of Athena, but without emotion, devoid of all expression, and her green eyes were as unseeing as those of a porcelain doll. Yet each time she turned the controls to make the panels squeeze her tight, her face shone with complete serenity. She did not acknowledge Athena and Cross in any way. Athena moved toward the top of the wooden box. She switched the controls so that she could lift the child out of the box. The child seemed to weigh almost nothing. Athena held her like an infant and bent her head to kiss the child's cheek, but the child flinched and pulled away. "It's your mommy," Athena said. "Won't you give me a kiss?" The tone of her voice broke Cross's heart child was churning wildly within her arms. Finally, Athena gently put her down on the floor. The child scrambled to her knees and immediately picked up a box of paints and a huge cardboard sheet. Completely absorbed, she began to paint. Cross stood back and watched as Athena tried all her acting skill to establish a rapport with the child. First, she kneeled down next to the little girl and was the loving playmate helping her daughter paint, but the child took no notice. Athena then sat up and tried to be a confiding parent, telling the child what was happening in the world. Then Athena became a fawning adult praising the child's paintings. To all this, the child merely kept moving away. Athena picked up one of the brushes and tried to help, but when the child did see, she grabbed the brush away. She never said a word. Finally, Athena gave up. "I'll come back tomorrow, darling," she said. I bring a new paint box. See," she said, tears welling in her eyes, "you're running out of reds." She tried to give the child a farewell kiss but was held away by two small, beautiful hands. Then Athena rose and led Cross out of the room. Athena gave him the keys to the car so he could drive back to Malibu, and during the ride, she held her head in her hands and wept. Cross was so stunned, he could not say a word. When they got out of the car, Athena seemed to have control of herself. She pulled Cross into the house and then turned and faced him. "That was the baby I told Boz I buried in the desert. Now do believe me?" And for the first time, Cross really believed she might love him. Athena led him into the kitchen and made coffee. They sat in the alcove to watch the ocean. As they drank their coffee, in her voice or on her face. "When I ran away from Boz, I left my baby with some distant cousins, a married couple in San Diego. She seemed like a normal baby. I didn't know she was autistic then; maybe she wasn't. I left her there because I was determined to be a successful actress. I had to make money for both of us. I was sure I was talented, and God knows everybody told me how beautiful I was. I always thought that when I was successful, I could take my baby back." So I worked in Los Angeles and visited her in San Diego whenever I could. Then I began to break through, and I didn't see her that often, maybe once a month. Finally, when I was ready to bring her home, I went to her third birthday party with all kinds of presents, but Bethany seemed to have slipped into another world. She was a blank. I could I thought maybe she had a brain tumor; remembered when Boz had let her fall on the floor. Maybe her brain had been injured and it was now beginning to show. For months after that, I brought her to doctors, and she underwent a battery of tests of all kinds. I took her to specialists, and they checked everything. Then someone and I don't remember whether it was the doctor in Boston or the psychiatrist in Texas Children's Hospital-told me she was autistic. I didn't even know what that meant except that I thought it was some kind of retardation. No,' the doctor said. It meant she lived in her own world, was unaware of other people's existence, had no interest in them, could feel nothing for anything or anyone. It was when I brought her to the clinic here to be close to me that we found she could respond to that hugging machine you saw. That seemed to help, so I had to leave her continued. "Being autistic meant she could never love me. But the doctors told me some autistic people are talented, even geniuslike. And I think Bethany is a genius. Not only with her painting but something else. The doctors tell me that after many years of hard training, some autistic people can be taught to care for some things, then some people. A few can even live a near-normal life. Right now, Bethany can't stand listening to music or any noise. But at first, she couldn't bear to have me touch her, and now she's learned to tolerate me, so she's better than she used to be." She still rejects me but not as violently. We've made some progress. I used to think it was punishment for my neglect of her because I wanted to be a success. But the specialists say that sometimes though it seems hereditary, it can be acquired, but they don't know what really makes it happen. Boz dropping her on her head or me deserting her, but I don't know if I believe that. They kept trying to reassure me that we were not responsible, that it was one of the mysteries of life, maybe it was preordained. They insisted nothing could have prevented it from happening and nothing can ever change it. But again, something inside me refuses to believe any of that. "Even when I first found out, I thought about it constantly. I had to make some hard decisions. I knew I would be helpless to rescue her until I made a lot of money. So I put her in the clinic and visited her at least one weekend a month and some weekdays. Finally, I got rich, I was famous, and nothing that mattered before mattered any longer. All I wanted was to be with Bethany. Even if this hadn't happened, I was going to quit after Messalina anyway." "Why?" Cross asked. "What a special clinic in France with this great doctor," Athena explained. "And I was going to go there after the picture. Then Boz showed up, and I knew he would kill me and Bethany would be all alone. That's why I used you to sort of put a contract out on him. She had nobody but me. And well, I'll bear that sin." Athena paused now and smiled at Cross. "It's worse than the soaps, isn't it?" she said with a small smile. Cross looked out over the ocean. It was a very bright oily blue in the sunlight. He remembered the little girl and her blank, masklike face that would never open up to this world. "What was that box she was lying in?" he asked. Athena laughed. "That's what gives me hope," she said. "Sad, isn't it? It's a hug box. A lot of autistic children like a hug from a person, but they don't have to connect or relate to another human being." Athena took a deep breath and said, "Cross, someday I'm going to take the place of that box. That's the whole purpose of my life now. My life has no meaning except for that. Isn't that funny? The studio tells me that I get thousands of letters from people who love me. In public, people want to touch me. Men keep telling me they love me. Everybody but Bethany, and she's the only one I want." Cross said, "I'll help you in any way I can." "Then call me next week," Athena said. "Let's be together as much as we can until Messalina is finished." "I'll call," Cross said. "I can't prove my innocence, but I love you more than anything in my life." "And are," Cross said. Now that she had been proved innocent, he could not bear for her to know the truth about him. Cross thought about Bethany, her blank face so artistically beautiful with its sharp planes, its mirror eyes: the rare human being totally free of sin. As for Athena, she had been judging Cross. Of all the people she knew, he was the only one who had ever seen her daughter since the child had been diagnosed as autistic. It had been a test. One of the greatest shocks of her life came when she found out that though she was so beautiful, though she was so talented (and she thought, with self-mockery, so kind, so gentle, so generous), her closest friends, men who loved her, and relatives who adored her sometimes seemed to relish her misfortunes. When Boz had given her a black eye-though everyone called Boz a no-good bastard-she caught in all of them a fleeting look of satisfaction. But when Boz those looks again. And she had been terribly hurt. For this time, she had understood completely. Of course they all loved her, she did not doubt that. But it seemed no one could resist a little touch of malice. Greatness in any form arouses envy. One of the reasons she loved Claudia was because she had never betrayed her with that look. It was why she kept Bethany so secret from her day-to-day life. She hated the idea that people she loved would have that fleeting look of satisfaction, that she had been punished for her own beauty. So though she knew the power of her beauty and used that power, she despised it. She longed for the day when lines would cut deep into her perfect face, each showing a path she had taken, a journey survived; when her body would fill out, soften, and enlarge her to provide comfort for those she'd hold and care for; and when her eyes would grow more liquid with mercy from she'd never shed. She'd grow smile lines around her mouth from laughing at herself and at life itself. How free she would be when she no longer feared the consequences of her physical beauty and instead delighted in its loss as it was replaced by a more enduring serenity. And so she had kept careful watch on Cross De Lena when he met Bethany, saw his slight recoil at first but then, afterward, nothing. She knew he was helplessly in love with her, and she saw that he did not have that certain look of satisfaction when he knew of her misfortune with Bethany.
Sarah Saffian always intended to search for her birth parents one day -- but they found her first. Here's how she coped after the phone call that rocked her world. // I awaken on January 29,1993. It is less than a month until my24th birthday. It's Friday, and I'm looking forward to the weekend. As on most mornings before heading to my magazine job in Manhattan, I go to the gym and then return home to shower, dress, eat breakfast. At nine-fifteen, after finishing my orange juice and double-checking that I have everything I need for the day-datebook, journal, notes for an article I'm writing-I'm ready to go. The telephone rings. "Hello?" "Hello, is Sarah Saff an there?" "This is Sarah." I guess that it's an editor, calling about freelance work. "Sarah, my name is Hannah Morgan*. I think I'm your birth mother. "Daughter Discovered With a single phone call on an ordinary morning, my lifelong vague curiosity about God," I whispered. Tears sprang to my eyes as I made my way to a chair. A pause. My birth mother started to speak, her voice soft and shaky but forthright. She didn't sound like a New Yorker, an uptight urban dweller-underneath her surface unease, I sensed a core of calmness. "I'm sorry to startle you by calling on the phone," Hannah hesitantly began, "but I worried that if I sent a letter and got no answer, I wouldn't know if you had received the letter and didn't want to write back or if you hadn't received the letter because I'd written to the wrong person." "Mm hm," I answered, reduced for a while to one-word or one-sound responses. To ground myself, I grabbed a scrap of notepaper off my desk and scribbled down key facts while we spoke. Hannah told me that she was 21 when she gave birth to me at Staten Island Hospital and that I father, Adam Leyder, attended college together, and I was conceived soon after graduation. She admitted that toward the end of the pregnancy, she began having second thoughts about giving me up but believed it was too late to change her mind. "I have another shock for you," she said. "I married your birth father, and we have three other children" -Renee, 14; Lucy, 10; and Samuel, 6; my biological siblings. "Oh, that's so wonderful," I heard myself saying. "Then I can visit you all at once." They lived in Hanover, New Hampshire, where Hannah worked as a potter and Adam as a draftsman. I tried to absorb this barrage of information. Then Hannah revealed the name she had given me, the one on my original birth certificate: Susan Morgan. I turned the strange name over in my head as if I were meeting a new person. Photograph Daughter's dilemma: Should she you tell me about your family?" she asked next. "I feel like I've been doing all the talking." In the split second before responding, I considered how best to relay the most painful piece of my story. I felt oddly protective of Hannah already. I had no intention of startling or hurting her and was loath to contribute to any regrets she had about relinquishing me. At the same time, I also felt protective of my family. I didn't want to give Hannah the impression that I had grown up neglected-I had always been cared for, loved without bounds. I had to be gentle but also direct with this woman who had given me life. "Well, one important thing you should know," I offered somewhat cautiously, "is that my mother died when I was 6." Hannah took in a short, sharp breath.' hat's one of the things birth mothers always fear, that something happens to the adoptive parents," was 6 too. "I was stunned by this unexpected parallel. But I blinked and recovered, going on to explain that my father had remarried when I was 10 and he and his new wife, whom I considered Mom, had had two children together within two years, my brother and sister. I reassured Hannah that I loved my family dearly. I told her that I had known I was adopted for almost as long as I could remember and I had always planned to seek out my birth parents one day. "What do you look like?" Hannah asked. "I have dark brown hair, wavy, about shoulder length, and green eyes ...." "Yes, I think we were told that you had green eyes. All of us but Sam have green eyes. Are you left-handed, by any chance?' -Yes!" "I'm left-handed. So are Lucy and Sam!" "Oh, is that genetic?" I asked. "I think your birth father is 6 feet 4." "I'm only 5 feet 5! What happened?" "Well, I'm not quite 5 feet 3." "Thanks alot!" We shared our first laugh. "Would it be all right if Adam called you?" Hannah asked. "I feel bad that I'm getting to talk to you without him here." "Why don't I try to call him instead?" I responded. "Maybe over the weekend." Before we hung up, Hannah asked me, "Did you ever think you would pick up the phone and it would be me?" I paused to think for a moment, then replied simply, "No, because I always assumed I would be the one making the call." Too Much, Too Soon I carefully returned the receiver to its cradle and fixated on it for a beat. Still sitting, I took a deep breath and switched my gaze to a point very quiet, in that palpable way that comes after there has been loud noise. Unclear of my emotions in this moment-shock? confusion? loss? -I nonetheless felt them physically, tingling through me. After several minutes, not knowing what else to do, I wiped my eyes, pulled on my backpack, and headed out. Once at the office, I said quick, perfunctory good-mornings as I made my way to my desk, where I sat and stared at my articles, letters turning into hieroglyphs, text blurring into two fuzzy, distant columns before my unfocusing eyes. I finally broke through my trance and called my father, who was home forthe day At the first sound of his voice, I began to cry in earnest. Between sobs, I told him about Hannah's phone call, and he said to come right over. I pleaded family emergency to my editor-the emergency being my newfound confusion about the concept of familyand left. As I walked from the subway to my parents' stoop, the tree in front of their brownstone, all looked a bit different, as though I were seeing them for the first time. Through a kitchen window, I saw Dad sitting, waiting. Noticing me, he smiled and got up to let me in. Relief flowed through me as we hugged, and I breathed in his warm, fatherly smell of soap and coffee and cigarettes. I sat down at the table, running my hands along it, and gradually began to feel oriented again, in these **30;341;TOOLONG. My father had a look of concern but not of surprise. "So, tell me what happened." I took him from the ring of the telephone through the entire conversation in as much detail as I could muster. I was dry-eyed, matter-of-fact, exhausted and wired at once. When I mentioned my birth name was Susan Morgan, he nodded. "Yes, I remember. 'Susan' was one of the few things we knew. That, and you through a Jewish agency." The confirmation quelled my fears that this woman might be an impostor or simply mistaken. As we talked, I felt deeply connected to my father, sure that he was my parent and not these strangers who had unexpectedly burst into my life. Who were they to me? He and I have always shared an especially close bond, but usually it is simply a silent understanding. Discussing my birth parents and my adoption brought our bond to the surface. Perhaps we were clinging to our connection, because this new element was potentially threatening-it didn't have a place in our world of father and daughter. After a while, I called Mom at work. I had been open with my father but cautiously so, afraid that he would feel defensive about my birth parents' sudden emergence. With my mother I could speak more freely, because even though Hannah and Adam presented a potential threat to her as well, she wasn't the one who'd adopted me. evening, however, she confessed that after hanging up, she'd asked a friend, "Why did she have to call Sarah? Why couldn't she have contacted us, so we could've acted as intermediaries?" But as she was admitting this, I felt glad that Hannah had called me. Each of us wanted to soften the blow for the other. I decided not to call my birth parents back yet. It was too soonI needed time to digest what had happened and to decide what I wanted to do about it. But in their eagerness, they didn't afford me that space. On Monday evening, the phone rang again. "Hey, Sarah, this is Adam Leyder, your birth father." My stomach leapt in panic. As the impact of both phone calls hit me at once, I felt not just startled but invaded. We exchanged much of the same information Hannah and I had-what we looked like, general overviews of our lives. When I for prompting these reactions and then stuttered, clearly moved, "I-I can't believe I'm talking to you. I'd drive down to New York to meet you on five minutes' notice and leave after five minutes if that was what you wanted." "No, please, don't do that, not yet," I answered, laughing shrilly in disbelief at my extreme situation. "I'd like to visit you someday, but right now, I'm overwhelmed even by these phone calls." Choosing my words deliberately, I tried to let him down easily. "I can't have an emotional upheaval every time the phone rings. Writing letters would be much more manageable for me, just while we figure all this out. Would that be okay with you?" He asked whether I would feel comfortable sending photographs along with the letters, but I answered that I wasn't even ready for that yet. He said he understood, stressing, "We want to," but I thought I could sense his disappointment, his urgency deflated. The following week, I received a single white business-size envelope addressed in neat capital letters-an architect's hand, which at first reminded me of my grandfather's. After staring at the return address for several moments, I carefully opened the envelope to find two separate letters, typed on a computer and hand-signed. I took a deep breath and plunged in. Building ia Bond My birth parents' letters were heartfelt, but they reflected an urgency to know me that I could not yet reciprocate. I read them repeatedly over the next several days. I carried them around, committed information to memory, analyzed the tone of certain phrases. Sometimes the sheer act of reading them made me cry. Hannah and Adam said they were encouraged rather than threatened by my close relationships with my parents. Touched by their generosity, I had the impulse to thank them. On the other hand, some of their words of love, in. While I was glad to have been spared the anxiety and frustration of detective work, I could not help but feel that by finding me first, they had robbed me of an opportunity rather than alleviated a burden.. I responded about a week later. I wrote how delicate and powerful I considered our connection to be, how carefully I wanted to proceed. They understood, allowing me to set the pace for our relationship. As we gradually opened up, our letters delved into the past, expressed anger and confusion, laid us bare, tentatively reached out with love. My defensiveness evolved into gratefulness and an expanded sense of family and identity. Three years after Hannah's phone call, I was ready for a reunion. Footnote "Some names have been changed. //
// For serious summer fun-and oodles of attention-slip into decadently sexy swim styles with disco-diva details like fringe, sequins, and rhinestones. Perfect for girls more into showing off than splashing around. Photographs by Tiziano Magni Suited for seduction Left: Crocheted cotton bra top, $38, and stretch cotton bikini bat toms, $20, Polo Jeans Co.RALPH LAUREN; Lucite headband, Frou by Paige Novick at Showroom Seven, $62; hoop earrings, Noir by Catalan, $60; ankle bracelet, Bess NYC. Right: Cotton short shorts, Iceberg, $200; studded bangles, Noir by Catalan, $25 each; sunglasses, Christian Dior, $180 Walk on the wild side Left: Net tap, Joelynian, $190; beaded bikini bottoms, Philosophy di Alberta Ferretti, $350; metallic slides, Donald J Pliner, $152; wide vermeil cuff, M+J Savitt, $150. Right: Ocelot print one-piece swimsuit, $195, under thong bikini bottoms, Dolce &; Gabbana; stretch metal belt, Dame, $12; flat metallic sandals (in model's hand), Fortuna shorts worn as bathing suit, Noir by Catalan; stockings, Wolford, $42; wooden wedge strappy sandals, Dolce &; Gabbana. Right: Tankini, ESPRIT, $46; sequin bikini bottoms, Ultra by Betsey Johnson, $100; fishnets, Hot Sox, $12; patent sandals, Donald J Pliner, $152; bracelet, Agatha, $24 Ladies who lounge Left: Suede bikini top with snakeskin flowers, Emilio Sosa, $250; bathing suit shorts, Balmain, $275; bracelets, Agatha, $24 each. Center: Studded cotton bra, $95, and strawberry-print thong, $170, Sonia Rykiel; sunglasses, Calvin Klein Eyewear, $195. Right: Tank top, $85, and arm gauntlets, Joelynian; cotton bikini bottoms with floral applique, Sportmax, $147; floral ponytail holder, Noir by Catalan, $30. Photographed at the Rockhouse Hotel in Negril, Jamaica. Blindingly beautiful Left: Sequin bikini top, D &G; Dolce &; Gabbana, $350; ruffled organza skirt, Alberta Ferretti; headband, Tarina Tarantino Designs. Right: Crystal bra, floral brocade miniskirt with crystal belt buckle, and leopard-print stockings, Dolce &; Gabbana. PAGE 272-273; Polo Jeans Co.RALPH LAUREN888-POLO-JEANS; www, polojeansco.com; select Bloomingdale's; Polo Jeans Co. stores nationwide. Frou by Paige Novick at Showroom Seven- Saks Fifth Avenue, New York City. Noir by Catalan-Anthropologie, nationwide; PrivY, Los Angeles; Verve, New York City (earrings). Calypso, New York City; Henri Bendel, New York City (bracelets). Bess New York City- Bond 07 by Selima, New York City; Selima, Los Angeles; Phoebe 45, Chicago. Iceberg- Iceberg boutique, New York City, 212-249-5412. Christian Dior-Neiman Marcus; Nord strom; Saks Fifth Avenue. Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph // PAGE 274-275: Joelynian- Kirna Zabete, New York City; Barneys, New York City. Philosophy dl Alberta Ferreti Philosophy boutique, New York City. Donald J Pliner-888-307-1630. M+J Savitt Bergdorf Goodman, New Dolce &; Gabbana- Dolce &; Gabbana boutiques, New York City; Bal Harbour. Dame- Specialty stores nationwide; Foley's, Texas. Fortune Valentino-Fortune Valentino, New York City, 212-941-5811. PAGE 276-277: Noir by Catalan-By special order at Henri Bendel, New York City. Wofford boutiques nationwide; 800-WOLFORD. Dolce &; Gabbana-Dolce &; Gabbana boutiques, New York City; Houston. ESPRIT800-0-ESPRIT. Ultra by Betsey Johnson-Betsey Johnson stores nationwide. Donald J Pliner-888-307-1630. Agatha- 800-AGATHA-7. PAGE 278-279: Emilio Sosa- M Shop, New York City. Agatha-800-AGATHA-7. Sonia Rykiel-Sonia Rykiel boutique, New York City. Calvin Klein Eyewear800645-1300; Calvin Klein, New York City. JoelynianLouis, Boston; Kima Zabete, New York City. Sportmax -- For MaxMara stores please cast 800-206-6872. Noir by Catalan- Anthropologie; Fred Segal Tiara; www.styleshop.com. PAGE 280-281: D &G; Dolce &; Gabbana- D &G; boutiques, New York City; Los Angeles Alberta Ferret Betsey Bunky Nini, New York City; Knit Wit, Philadelphia. Joomi Joolz atD.P. **28;1033;TOOLONG Jennifer Kaufman, Los Angeles Dolce &; Gabbana -- Nordstrom; Dolce &; Gabbana boutique, New York City; Neiman Marcus (bra). Maxfield; Ultimo; Dolce &; Gabbana boutique, New York City (miniskirt). Dolce &; Gabbana boutiques, New York City; Houston; Bal Harbour (stockings),
ow-gasmic experience Recently, my boyfriend has started biting me a lot during sex. It began with a little nipping and nibbling, but now he's actually leaving teeth marks. I've told him that it hurts, but every now and then, he slips and does it again. How did my sweet, gentle boyfriend turn into a vampire? Ouch! Nipping and nibbling are a long-estabfished part of sexual excitement, but when foreplay turns into bloodlust, that's going too far. Chances are, your boyfriend is not doing it deliberately to hurt you; he's in the throes of excitement, and he's biting you in the mindless way an orgasmic woman might run her nails down her lover's back without even realizing she is doing it. I don't think you need to worry that he is a sadist or vampire, as you say he slips up only once in a while. You could even interpret his nibbling as a sign of his affection. How often do we say to someone we think is adorable I could just. Before lovemaking, give him a hard candy to suck on or gum to chew. Or keep something sweet on your bedside table, and when the biting gets overwhelming, pop a ripe peach or chocolate bar into his mouth to keep it occupied. Do it in a lighthearted way and your midsex snack could become a sexy little secret between you. Of course, if you continue to be the snack, it may be time to say au revoir to your vampire. narcissistic nooky My guy has mirrors all over his bedroom, which is cool. But recently, I realized that whenever we have sex, he's staring at himself, not us. On top of that, he's constantly asking me to talk about how hot his body is. Is he in love with himself? No, he is not in love with himself. On the contrary, those who need constant admiration and reassurance are actually insecure about who they are and how they are perceived. When a man spends an building up his body, there's a good chance he is overcompensating in one area to make up for what he fears are deficiencies in another. He may focus on his looks because he feels inadequate about his career, his social life, or his financial situation. If your boyfriend's physical self-obsession is restricted to the bedroom, it suggests that his basic insecurity probably has to do with sexual performance. You need to remind him that sex is not all about performance-is often just about being intimate with your partner. To show him how fun it can be and wean him off his own reflection, why not playfully suggest a blindfold? Grab a few props-feathers, ice cubes, a sponge, and essential oils-and ask him to guess what you are touching him with and what you are going to do next. Make love occasionally in the open air or anywhere else that is far from mirrors. Be sure he knows that you find him to be a real turn on, not for how he looks I were virgins when we got together. Recently, he's been begging me to try new things. At first, I wasn't comfortable, but we've started to experiment and it feels great.When we finish though, I end up shaking and crying uncontrollably. Why Is this happening? There are two possible explanations. The first is that, being inexperienced, you feel guilty about finding so much pleasure in what, until recently, was forbidden behavior in the bedroom. You may cry like a baby because you know that what you are doing would shock and upset your parents if they were to catch you. First, you need to understand that sexual intimacy with a caring partner, however adventurous or dirty it may seem, is an expression of love, not just lust, and there's absolutely nothing wrong with it. Time and more expert ence will ease your guilt. You can help the head ing process along by talking to your boyfriend and sharing your concerns with him. If you you end up shaking and crying is because the sex is so powerful and pleasurable that you have a strong emotional reaction. A number of men and women can not stop themselves from crying and trembling all over after they have had a huge orgasm. Imagine an intense sexual experience as a gradual climb to the peak of a high mountain, the view extending and becoming more awesome at every step. Then, when you reach the top, down you fly in one huge, thrilling rush! Thats enough to leave anyone shaken, isn't it? And its enough to leave some people in tears too. material girl I come from a wealthy family, so I've always had really nice things. Recently though, my family lost all of its money, and now we're broke. Still, I've been too embarrassed to let on to my friends, so I keep spending money. I have maxed out five credit cards. How can I change? You buy things to make yourself momentarily into debt, so you shop some more to make yourself momentarily forget your troubles, and you get deeper in debt .. and on and on. This vicious cycle stems from an addiction. You are not obsessed with material things; you are hooked on the momentary lift it gives you to buy or acquire them. Don't be so quick to blame your problem on the loss of your family's fortune; clearly, you were a shopaholic a long time before things went wrong, but it only began to hurt when you could no longer pay the bills. You and you alone can put an end to this ugly spiral. First, if you do not have a job, join the rest of society and try to get one. If you are not qualified for employment in the career of your choice, then take whatever job you can get while you study in your spare time to earn the proper credentials. Second, talk to an adviser at your bank about how to manage your account You may also want to invest in a good financial book, like Suze Orman's The 9 Steps to Financial Freedom. Then invite your best friends over for a cutting-up celebration: Let them toast you while you cut your credit cards into tiny pieces and throw them away. Don't be ashamed! The very idea that you're embarrassed to be honest with your friends about your situation shows that you suffer from a very low opinion of yourself and, incidentally, of them. True friends don't care about what you wear-they care about who you are. Finally, I urge you to find another pastime to replace shopping in your life. Perhaps you can start volunteering with troubled children or help collect for a third-world relief fund and see what big trouble really looks like. If there's any time left, pursue whatever artistic or spiritual pleasures appeal to you. Walk in the park. Go to outdoor concerts. Visit museums. Learn the names of the constellations. If its free, do it edge, and a broader view of the world. bust-loving beau Although he's never said anything, I think my boyfriend is obsessed with abnormally large breasts. I always catch him staring at women's chests. Mine happen to be pretty small, so I'm starting to feel inadequate. Would he rather be with a bust woman? Obviously, your boyfriend cares about you, because he chooses to be with you instead of a busty Barbie-doll type, doesn't he? However, courteous men don't check out girls when they are out with a woman they care about. It sounds like this guy needs a few lessons in etiquette. Tell him outright that when he ogles other women, it makes you feel bad. Even if he can't help himself, he'll at least try to be more discreet about it. As for your feeling "inadequate," you must realize that big boobs don't do anything that small ones can't do as well or better. Sexually, small sensitive; they can nourish offspring just as well; and when it comes to attracting admiring looks, women with small breasts can wear sleek clothes that don't suit big busts. So ignore your beau and walk just as tall and proud as any busty woman does. panic room I've been with this guy for eight months, but recently, he's been having anxiety attacks. He says he's panicking because he thinks we spend too much time together and he feels suffocated. He told me he needs a couple of days a week to himself. Does he want to break up? As often as we women complain about men never telling us how they feel, just as often, we don't hear them when they do. Why not? Because they are telling us something we would rather not know. Your boyfriend is saying that he feels suffocated. Of course, it is a hard message to receive, but he's being honest. He is not telling you he wants to a little bit in order to be absolutely certain about the relationship before you both get in any deeper. Do him the service of taking him at his word, and cool it. He may have a point. It sounds as if things became hot and heavy too soon. Please, try not to be hurt or angry with him. Use this period of semi separation to let things settle in your own mind and to find out more about your needs and desires. See friends and do different things two or three nights a week, and if you have vacalion time, go away for a bit. Make some changes in your routine and maybe your appearance too. Play a little hard to get. Let him call you, and don't always be available when he wants to see you either. I wish I could tell you that after a cooling-down period, you two will know that you want to be together for a lifetime. Maybe you will. But if you don't, you really need so that someday, you can find someone else who is ready for the kind of commitment in which neither person feels suffocated. same-sex suspicion Ally boyfriend's best friend is a really goodlooking gay guy. They are always doing stuff together, including going out to gay bars, and sometimes my boyfriend even crashes at his place if he's too drunk to drive. I'm starting to wonder if they are having an affair. What should I do? It is great when a straight guy is comfortable with a gay friend's sexuality. But it sounds as though your boyfriend and his gay friend are a little too close for comfort. I am not suggesting that your boyfriend is gay or bisexual or that he is using you as a "beard" to hide behind until he feels ready to come out. But even if you two have a frisky sex life, you do have reason to wonder. After all, gay clubs exist for just one reason, and a supposedly straight guy of male attention. Also, when your boyfriend is drunk and stays over at his friend's place, I assume his friend is probably drunk too. In other words, they are two men with zero inhibitions. But in the end, all of this is speculation, and you need more information before you make any judgments. Invite yourself along the next time they go out together. Watch their communication and body language. Get to know the other guy too. He is your boyfriend's best friend, after all. Ask him out for a coffee and find out more about him. Aside from being good-looking and gay, what are his interests? What does he have in common with your boyfriend? Do you like him? Do you trust him? Of course, if doubts persist, you will have to look your boyfriend in the eye and ask him calmly and coolly if there is anything more than friendship between him and his best friend. Maybe he will laugh; maybe he will either assuage your fears or fess up. And if you think he's fibbing, then you must break it off. If you don't trust him now, you never will. klepto conundrum About a year ago, I stole a lipstick from my friend. Since that time, I've stolen bigger things, and I can't seem to stop. Recently, my friend found her grandmother's ring, which I stole, at my place, and now she won't speak to me. How do I get her to forgive me and stop myself from stealing again? It sounds as if you suffer from a condition called kleptomania-a compulsion to steal things you neither need nor even want. In the broadest terms, kleptomania affects mostly women, often those who on some level feel deprived, not of material things but of recognition, love, or security. Because your stealing doesn't seem to be out of need or greed, its source is probably emotional. You can stop yourself, but to recommend a counselor or therapist who can help you find out what it is you feel your life is missing that others seem to have: not a lipstick, not Grannys ring, but something deeper and closer to your heart. Do it now. Then write to your friend and explain that the episode with her grandmother's ring made you realize that you have a serious problem, and tell her you are seeking treatment for it. Ask her to please forgive you for causing her unhappiness. When she realizes the true nature of your problem and knows you are on the road to curing it, I hope and believe that she will understand and gradually renew your friendship. If you have a problem, E-mail Irma Kurtz at cosmo-agony@hearst.com or write to her at Cosmopolitan, Agony, P.O. Box 1721, Sandusky, OH 44871-17216. Sidebar
Snags, frustrations, and fights can turn paradise found into holiday hell. Use these tips to stay mellow and so into each other. // You're taking a trip together. Get ready for a weeklong fantasy for two, right? Well, maybe. "Yes, vacations are like mini utopias in that there's no daily grind, but that doesn't mean you're going to agree magically on everything," says sex and relationship expert Joy Davidson, PhD, author of Fearless Sex. In fact, trips a deux can be a prime breeding ground for problems: travel headaches, clashing relaxation styles, major pressure for everything to be postcard perfect. But if you know how to deal ahead of time, you can keep your romantic Club Med from morphing into Club Mediocre (or worse, Club **25;1301;TOOLONG). HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 1 You Begin the Vacation Stressed Out Lingering work hassles, traffic jams, and near anal probes by airport security don't exactly foster feelings of R &; R. In fact, the stress can spill over into resulting cranky "tude, fast. "Scan and I hit traffic on our way to the airport. He had road rage, and I was freaking out that we'd miss our flight," says Kate*, 30. "By the time we boarded the plane to Hawaii, we were barely talking to each other." It's understandable. All the details that have to be wrapped up before you can escape-work deadlines, bikini shopping, pet boarding-shorten your fuse. Suddenly, a line that's 10 deep at the check-in counter is enough to cause a meltdown. So to ensure your tension doesn't eclipse the trip, acknowledge the sucky situation and blame it rather than each other, suggests couples therapist Paul Coleman, PsyD. author of How to Say It: For Couples. "Say," Getting to the airport was a nightmare. Thank God that's over." "That way you recognize the torture, but you also confirm that it's now done with so yon can in transit, ease further into mai tai mode by discussing your plans for the week ahead. Visions of pigging out and sleeping until noon will make your stresses a distant memory." A few hours into the flight, Sean finally said, Tm so glad we're away. And I'm so looking forward to seeing you in a grass skirt," Kate recalls. "That was all it took. I wasn't annoyed anymore." HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 2 Big Spender Versus Tightwad Cash can be a problem if one of you is thinking filet mignon while the other is sneaking plastic bags into the all-you-caneat buffet. To get what you both want, start with the cold hard facts. What's your budget for meals, tours, side trips, etc.? Once you have a figure, you can strike a balance on how to spend it. Coleman suggests that you mix it up. For instance, have el cheapo lunches so you can justify splurging on fancier dinners. Then, and be resourceful. "On a trip to New Mexico, Jerry didn't want to shell out $30 for a guided tour of the Indian ruins, which I really wanted to see," says Jennifer, 27. "But after talking to some locals, we found out about a walk to some cool caverns. It was beautiful and private, and we were both happy," she says. And if despite the clever spending yon still crave a little pampering, treat yourself. "When we got back to the hotel, I semisplurged on a massage, which was still a lot less than the tour would have been, while Jerry hung by the pool, probably counting his nickels." HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 3 Your Idea of Fun Doesn't Mesh With His Love gurus will tell you that compromise is so healthy. Yeah, right-not if it means ending up with a watered-down version of the vacation you really wanted. "My job is stressful, so I wanted to lie out, 29." But Matt wanted to go hiking, hiking, and sweating. "Fact is that while a vacation is partly about getting close, it's also about having F-U-N. So in the name of achieving that, you don't have to do every little thing together." Matt and I did go to an island, but while I spent the afternoons reading books on the beach, he was off windsurfing or rock climbing. It was bliss," says Natalie. So detach from the hip on some days. You'll both get what you want and have exciting stories to tell each other afterward. Also, allow each other to suggest an activity the other person has to try. Yes, that means you may have to go on one hike, but you'll probably enjoy yourself. Plus, it shows a willingness to accommodate each others needs. Most important: "Don't be tit-for-tat (' I give up something, you give up something''), resentful when it doesn't add up," advises Coleman. Instead, be open to trying each others styles. And hey, who knows what frisky thoughts will enter your mind when you reach the top of the mountain. HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 4 Your Sexpectations Clash For some, vacations mean shagging like Viagra-popping monkeys. For others, its a pig-out and snooze marathon. So how to jibe your desires? If your sex drive is in siesta mode and he's the sex-crazed chimp, don't feel pressured to throw him a mercy bonk every time he bones up, insists Davidson. But bear in mind, your libido may be jet-lagged, which he may be able to remedy with some sensual, hands-on persuasion. If you're really not feeling the magic, just let him know you need a little time to ease into things. If it's just the opposite-you own the insatiable sex drive; he's there for a beer buzz-partaking in a few adrenaline-pumping activities may launch his loins. "Any a foreign city-strengthens your bond," says Coleman. "Plus, it'll boost his testosterone levels, making him feel infinitely more sexual." To further stoke his fire, make some sexual suggestions in a nonsexual setting. Mention doing it in the late afternoon, for instance, or a randy location switch, like swapping the bed for the balcony. Your dirty desires will give him a seriously bad case of sex-on-the-brain over breakfast. HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 5 You Need Space Don't feel guilty about craving a little me-time. You're trying to rejuvenate, and that involves time together... and apart. So call a mini vacay from the vacay for some time inside your own head, says Coleman. "You relax by yourself in away that you can't when you're with him." The trick, however, is asking for time out without coming offlike an antisocial hermit. One option: Choose an activity that is distinctly chick. When Julia, 26, needed a little another time, I booked a treatment at the resort spa," she admits. "Keith was not at all interested." Alternatively, just explain to your guy that you need time to detox your fried brain and say you'll meet him back at the room in one hour. But don't stay away too much longer than that or he may fear you've found yourself a cute cabana boy. HOLIDAY LOVE HURDLE 6 You Go Head-to-Head In the alternate universe that is a vacation-where we expect to be a supercouple who agree on every little thing-spats seem so much worse: (a) Hi. You're supposed to be having an amazing time, and (b) Who packed the emotional baggage? Regardless, its in your best interest to patch things up fast so you can start enjoying some quality time together, pronto. "First, you have to decide what battles are worth waging," says Davidson. If he invites his new best friend Dave the barman and his girlfriend, forward to a romantic dinner for two, it might be worth sucking it up and letting the good times roll. If it's a deeper issue, such as the way he cops an attitude if you sleep too late and miss the "shining" sunrise, hashing it out right there saves you from brewing resentment and exploding later. "Give yourselves one hour to seek a solution," says Davidson. When the time's up, hopefully, you'll have reached a compromise... even if it's agreeing to table the discussion (and angry feelings) until you're back home. Then you can proceed directly to makeup sex. Sidebar Lust in Translation Don't let a language barrier nix nooky. Here's how to say condom around the globe: * French: preservatif * Spanish: condon * Italian: preservative * Dutch: condoom * Australian: franger Sidebar If your libido is jet-lagged, his sensual hands-on persuasion might help. Sidebar Vacation Ideas That Will Send Your Man Packing these. * A trip to Hawaii for a taping of Live With Regis and Kelly in Honolulu! * Anything involving apple picking or pumpkin patches * An RV trip through the Midwest with your entire family. Who's in the mood for a sing-along? * A narrated trolley tour of a city's Victorian architecture. * A weekend soul-searching retreat: "Dream Logging: Reclaim Your Power, Creativity, and Brilliance." Actually, a retreat, period. * Detoxing for a week at the organic-only, meat-free, air-is-the-new-chocolate health farm that recently opened upstate Footnote * Names have been changed. //
Sometimes they're sweet, sometimes they're scary, but your child's nighttime musings can tell you what's on his mind... if you know the right way to interpret them. Here's the scoop. BY GINNY GRAVES // Heidi Eigsti, 35, of Lakewood, Colorado, says her third child was about a month old when 4-year-old Ryan, iicr oldest, awoke in a weepy funk. "He told me he had dreamed that he was yelling for me and I didn't come," Eigsti says. "Even a sleep-deprived new mommy can figure out what that one means." Like e-mail from the subconscious, your child's dreams bear messages about his innermost thoughts and feelings. "Dreams give parents a wonderful opportunity to learn more about their children, because they often convey information that kids are unable to express, or even fully understand, themselves," says Patricia Garfield, Ph.D., president of the Association for the Study of Dreams (ASD). Here's the lowdown on how to decode those dreams-and deal with the: The dream lives of babies remain a mystery for one simple reason: No 2-month-old has ever woken up and said, "I had the darnedest dream last night .... Scientists do know, however, that even in the womb, infants spend much of their time in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, during which dreaming usually occurs in older children and adults. In fact, full-term babies spend 50 percent, and premature babies log up to 80 percent, of their total sleep time in the REM stage, as compared with the 20 to 25 percent REM sleep in adults. The large amounts of REM sleep early on may actually be critical to the emotional and sensory development of your baby, experts say. The search for meaning: If your infant does have dreams, they probably help her incorporate new information into her ever-expanding worldview, and perhaps even give her the chance to test-drive new skills. Kelly Bulkeley, Ph.D., past president of ASD, relates the story of a mother who was, something he'd never done before. A week later, he laughed for the first time when he was awake. "It's very possible he was learning how to do so in his dreams," says Dr. Bulkeley, who also is coauthor of Dreamcatching: Every Parent's Guide to Exploring and Understanding Children's Dreams and Nightmares. Helping kids navigate the night: If your baby wakes up and a process of elimination (dry diaper, no fever, well -- fed) leads you to suspect a dream is the culprit, rub her back and comfort her in your most soothing "there, there" manner. If she has a stuffed animal or blanket, stroke her cheek with it to get her attention, then hand it to her, and when she's calm, split. ONE- AND 2-YEAR-OLDS The dream scene: The thinking goes that your child's dreams evolve along with his verbal and cognitive abilities, says Rafael Pelayo, M.D., head of pediatric services at the Stanford Sleep to "play" mentally-pretend to be a puppy, say-his dream machine is probably starting to create brief, simple images, usually of pet animals. The search for meaning: Why animals, you ask? Toddlers identify in a big way with cute little creatures who have to do as they're told. However, you probably won't be aware of these warm and fuzzy animal dreams. What you will know about are nightmares, since they have enough emotional oomph to awaken her. If your kid seems to be having a lot of bad dreams, remember this: Nightmares deal with things that (continued on page 194) challenge the dreamer's sense of the world, which, for children, applies to just about everything. In very young children, bad dreams are often triggered by separation anxiety, which may be even more acute at night when a child is lying in a crib or bed alone. Helping kids navigate the night: As the official bogeyman-banisher, offer love and comfort-specifically, a "It's okay, Mommy's here." If your child is fairly verbal, Dr. Bulkeley recommends saying, "Dreams are stories we tell ourselves when we're sleeping. They may look scary, but they can't hurt you." Don't worry too much if she doesn't get the concept just yet. With time and repetition, it will sink in. 3- TO 5-YEAR-OLDS The dream scene: Now that your child's imagination has kicked into high gear, expect her dream life to, also. This is the age at which nightmare frequency peaks. Count on more early -- morning awakenings, when nightmares usually strike, populated by monsters, witches, all-purpose bad guys, and scary animals. "Children this age also frequently dream that bad things happen to themselves or people in their families," says Richard Gallagher, Ph.D., director of the Parenting Institute at New York University's Child Study Center in Manhattan. The search for meaning: Preschoolers' main struggle is to understand the people-you, her siblings, her favorite friends-doing familiar things. "It's as if children were repeating to themselves, 'These are the people I know and trust. If I ever need help, I can rely on them,'" says Alan Siegel, Ph.D., a child psychologist specializing in children's dreams. Prepare yourself for the day, however, when your little angel's subconscious transforms you into a wild animal or a terrible monster. Before you assume your child is harboring some hideous resentment toward you, remember: You're the one who (often) says no. Your child's bad dreams actually help her deal with your anger and disapproval, both of which are frightening and confusing. Helping kids navigate the night: To get a better handle on your child's fears and concerns, encourage her to explore her dreams by asking open-ended questions. How did it feel to be chased by a rabbit? What happened next? If the dream was frightening, sympathize with her fear, Mommy and Daddy) have bad dreams sometimes. Helping her draw a picture of the nightmare can also minimize its impact. If your child seems especially troubled by the dream, explain to her that she can change the dream should it recur. "Even very young children can start manipulating their dreams," says Dr. Pelayo. When in REM, she could use a magic wand to make the tiger disappear, or glue could keep the dog's mouth shut. You can even rehearse the new dream plot by acting it out to help embed the dream's new ending in her memory. // DREAM THEMES DECODED // Sometimes scary dreams cross the threshold into night terrors, a sleep disorder that occurs in the first half of the night during the deepest non-REM stages of sleep and peaks between the ages of 3 and 7, afflicting one in four kids. In a standard episode, the child will be wide-eyed, screaming, and flailing about, but oblivious to your presence. Try not to restrain your own (usually within 15 minutes), and find solace in the fact that she won't remember it in the morning, says Mark Mahowald, M.D., director (continued on page 196) of the Minnesota Regional Sleep Disorders Center at Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis. 6- TO 12-YEAR-OLDS The dream scene: This is the stage at which dreams become infused with more grown-up social concerns. Nancy Odom, mother of 6-year-old Laurel, in Auburn, California, notes: "Laurel's dreams are less frightening but more anxiety -- provoking now. She'll dream about kids at school being mean to her or ignoring her." By age 6, the frequency of dreaming stabilizes, so that older children are spending the same amount of their total sleep time in REM as adults, about 25 percent. Between the ages of 9 and 12, children's dreams start resembling adults' in terms of length (an average of about 20 minutes) and complexity. The search for meaning: Odds are, top three good dreams are enjoying a fun activity, getting a new possession, and performing well, all of which are usually straightforward wish-fulfillment scenarios. The most common bad dreams include being chased and attacked, which may occur when your child feels under too much pressure; sensing something scary in the offing, which reveals that she thinks some troubling real-life situation will get worse; and injury or death, which can carry the message, "I feel hurt." Helping kids navigate the night: Don't indulge in armchair analysis of your child's dreams. Instead, encourage discussion by offering up one of your own dreams. "The communication that occurs in family dream-sharing can help children feel reassured and understood," says Dr. Siegel. When bad dreams crop up, prompt her to talk about them with interested questions-What did you do next? How did that make you feel? When nightmares recur, take it as a sign that your child is at some sort of psychological impasse. To locate the dream, and try to connect the emotions in the dream with things that could be troubling her in her waking life. If nightmares persist in spite of your best efforts, discuss the situation with your pediatrician. Author Affiliation Ginny Graves wrote "No More Bedtime Battles, Period" in the May issue of Redbook. //
You can fix it with a phone call-but many of you still don't take the time. // NEVER "FORGET" ANOTHER DOCTOR'S APPOINTMENT! Making an appointment is one thing; remembering it is another. To the rescue, these online services: * www.uRemember.com: Click on the "wireless reminders" feature, and they'll send a reminder to you before your appointment via e-mail, voice mail, or pager. * www.papsmear.org: The College of American Pathologists offers a free e-mail reminder service to help you remember to schedule an annual Pap. * www.nabco.org: Click on the e-mail reminder prompt and 10 months after a doctor's breast exam or mammogram, you'll get a message reminding you to schedule an appointment. www.iVillage.com: Never forget another mammogram -- click on the "Breast Exam Reminder" and get an annual prompt. (There's a monthly self-exam option!) I confess: Until recently I hadn't been to the dentist in almost three years. And believe me, I had no business disregarding my dental health. I've had father has been wearing a complete set of dentures since his teens, and -- this is embarrassing-I can typically count on one hand the number of times I flossed in a month. You would think that a person with teeth like mine would make dental appointments a priority. But the truth is I "forget" to see the dentist the same way I "forget" to deal with the junk closet I've been meaning to organize for more than a year. Whatever the reason you put off making a doctor's appointment-you're scared, too busy, or just plain lazy -- you should at least know what you're risking health-wise when you do procrastinate. Here, which doctor's appointments you should definitely be making-and keeping-and what can happen if you let the visit "slip your mind." MUST-KEEP APPOINTMENT #1: YOUR FANILY DOCTOR OR INTERNIST How often you should go: Every three years after the age of 20, according to the American Academy of Family Physicians. Just seeing your ob/gyn doesn't Ob/gyns only look at a small percentage of your total body, and while you may get your blood pressure and weight checked, you still need a full physical from your family physician to check other body systems: your heart and lungs, your digestive organs, your skin (skin cancer is the number three cancer in women 25 to 35), and so on. How long you can put it off: Don't-very few of us are considered healthy enough to let appointments slide longer than three years. "Healthy enough" means you're a nonsmoker, eat a low -- fat, varied diet, exercise regularly, practice safe sex, limit alcohol intake, perform monthly breast self-examinations, protect yourself from the sun, and have no family history of disease. How to stop skipping appointments: Do you fear a reprimand from your doctor if it's been a while? "If your doctor scolds you, you may need a new one," says Bruce Bagley, M.D., a family physician in it's possible they've let some of their checkups slide. It is not unusual for doctors to assume they can detect their own ailments just because they've had medical training. So stop cringing and take steps to get the most out of your "comeback visit." "When you make your appointment, tell the receptionist that you haven't seen the doctor in a while, and ask her what tests and examinations will be performed," says Don Price, a practice management consultant in Ottawa, Ontario. "This will allow time to make a list of any long-term health concerns that might not be covered in a routine annual examination." Photograph Don't amass appointment reminders-act on them! // MUST-KEEP APPOINTMENT #2: YOUR OB/GYN How often you should go: Once a year -- no ifs, ands, or buts. All women need a routine pelvic and breast examination. If you take oral contraceptives, suffer from a recurrent problem like urinary tract infections or yeast infections, or have had have to face the stirrups more often. How long you can put it off: Don't even think about it. The risks you take by not going to the gynecologist make the trip well worth it. Annual Pap smears will pick up any cell abnormalities that could be the first signs of an STD or cancer -- which is best caught early. "I see patients who haven't had a Pap in years," says Mary Jane Bovo, M.D., an ob/gyn in private practice in New York City. "By then they've got an invasive cancer and need immediate treatment. It doesn't happen often, but it can. It's distressing for a doctor, because you can't make them come in for an appointment." How to stop skipping appointments: One of the main reasons women avoid the gynecologist is that they don't feel comfortable with their doctor. But it may help to think of your doctor as you would anyone else you'd hire. You wouldn't keep with him or trust him. Get referrals you can trust by asking friends and co-workers who have the same health plan you do. And when you find a candidate, think of the first appointment as a time to discuss your concerns to see if your personalities mesh well. Finding a doctor you're comfortable with will make all the difference when you have to go in for your next annual exam. MUST-KEEP APPOINTMENT #3: YOUR DERMATOLOGIST How often you should go: Depending on your medical history, maybe not at all. But if you have a family history of skin cancer, or have unusual or more than 50 moles or skin markings, you should probably see a dermatologist at least once to determine whether you're at high risk. How long you can put it off: Not longer than a year if you have a family history of melanoma, since this type of skin cancer develops quickly-and can kill quickly, says Alexa Boer Kimball, M.D., a professor of dermatology at Stanford University. But skin cancer, like basal cell carcinoma, you can afford to lag as much as every year and a half, since these types take up to five years to develop. Nevertheless, it's smart to get in for a skin check annually, since these non-life-threatening types of cancers can still be disfiguring if they spread unchecked. If you notice any changes in moles-size, shape, or color-you should also see a skin doc as soon as possible to determine how often they need to be checked (which can range from every six months to every two years). How to stop skipping appointments: Stop fooling yourself-even if you do your own skin exams, it's tough to self-check some parts of the body, like your back, your scalp, and your ears. "Some skin cancers, like melanoma, can show up on the soles of the feet, which people usually neglect," says Kimball. If your family practitioner performs skin checks-and many do-that may not be enough either. "Though students only get a couple of weeks of training in dermatology-and that may not be enough," she says. MUST-KEEP APPOINTMENT #4: YOUR DENTIST How often you should go: At least twice a year for a cleaning and a checkup. The reason? Unlike other medical problems such as colds or rashes, mouth conditions rarely heal themselves; they only get worse. How long you can put it off: If you only got to the dentist once this year, it's okay. But get back on the twice a year track: "Don't be misled if you have no pain or bleeding; oral cancers and gum disease are virtually symptomless until they're in their end stages," says Christine Dumas, a dentist in Los Angeles. There's more than just your oral health at stake: "Unchecked bacterial buildup could lead to periodontal disease, which is also associated with strokes, heart attacks, or if you're pregnant, preterm birth. A dental visit can even tell you whether says Richard H. Price, a dentist in Newton, MA. How to stop skipping appointments: Fight your fear. Nearly 20 percent of us fear the dentist so much we avoid exams. To ease your anxiety, Timothy A. Smith, Ph.D., an expert on dental phobias at the University of Kentucky College of Medicine and Dentistry in Lexington, advises that you start out with a consultation," just to talk to the dentist about what's going to be done so you know exactly what to expect. "Next, schedule an innocuous procedure such as a cleaning. If you can't make the jump to more involved procedures like getting a cavity filled, ask for a painkiller such as lidocaine or the sedative nitrous oxide (both may be covered by insurance). Sidebar SPEND LESS TIME IN THE WAITING ROOM Sidebar So you finally make that appointment, and how do you spend your afternoon? Waiting and waiting and waiting to see the doctor. Cut the frustration and wasted time with these insider's appointments for first thing in the morning or right after lunch to ensure that you're not stuck in the waiting room while previous patients' appointments run long. (Avoid Mondays, which tend to be hectic Sidebar because emergency patients who've been sick over the weekend get dibs on the doctor's time.) * DO N'T PLAY THE WAITING GAME. Before you leave for the doctor's office, call to ask the receptionist if the doctor is running behind schedule. * ASK AHEAD. If you're going to see a doctor for particular tests or procedures, ask the office staff for specifics: Will you have to see more than one doctor for the tests? Will you have to go to a lab on another floor for the procedure? Sidebar When the results are in, will you have to come back for another visit? If you know these answers beforehand, you won't be surprised when a visit becomes a long -- drawn-out affair. * MAKE A HIT LIST. Before you go to the things you want to discuss with her and prioritize them. Consider having the office staff give a copy of the list to your doctor while you're in the waiting room so that you and your doctor are both prepared once your exam starts. //
and wanted to send you a hearty "Thanks!" I have not seen Nia's movie or TV show yet, but I now consider myself a fan. She is a refreshing, delightful, obviously talented, and beautiful real-life woman. Traci Miller Williams Woodville, Alabama Hooray for Nia Vardalos! She looks great just the way she is, and she's also an inspiration. We should all take a lesson from her and realize we are beautiful in our own way, even if we don't fit the cookie-cutter mold that Hollywood tries to cram us into. C. Miller Norton, Virginia I saw your terrific April cover of Nia Vardalos and I just had to buy it. Nia and I have so much in common. We are both from Winnipeg-how exciting! But I wanted to let you know that Winnipeg is located in Manitoba, not Ontario, as written in your article. Again, congratulations on a great cover. Marika Bandera Toronto Reader rave I received my April 2003 issue of Redbook and fell in love with it. I shared "with all my girlfriends. A few of us have just had babies, so it was perfect timing: We can't wait to try some of your helpful tips and lose a few pounds. This issue is a keeper! Melissa Glover Cincinnati Lifesaving news I am writing to express my sincere appreciation for a job well done. Your article "Ovarian Cancer: The Facts That Could Save Your Life" April is a wonderful package of invaluable information that will educate millions of women across the country about ovarian cancer. The ovarian cancer community is excited about the enormous impact this feature will have on your readers. Every woman who reads this article is one more person who will know the symptoms and risks of ovarian cancer-knowledge that may ultimately save her life. As a survivor, I want to congratulate Redbook on putting together such a comprehensive, step-by-step piece on this dreaded disease. Patricia Goldman, president of the Ovarian Cancer National Alliance Washington, DC Thank your for the article on ovarian cancer. For more ovarian cancer, she had the symptoms your article described. Although she told many doctors how she felt and requested a CA-125 blood test, they would not give it to her. I hope in time that more doctors will listen when a patient complains of the symptoms you mentioned and will address them immediately. It could save lives and keep many people from suffering. Thanks again for such a helpful article. Nancy Stern San Jose, California Sizing up I just read your April issue and was especially thrilled with the article "The Best Jeans for Your Body." I am a larger-size woman and get so disgusted by the fact that most magazines do not pay any attention to women over size 12. When I saw women wearing plus-size jeans on your pages, it made me so happy! I want to thank you for what you've done to make me feel prouder than ever about who I am. Keep up the good work; I intend to recommend you to all my friends. Jessica Johnson regard to your article "I Thought I Was Too Young for Osteoporosis" February. Not only did I think I was too young to have the problem, I believed that, since I'm part African American, I was exempt. Boy, was I wrong! Most doctors do not give bone-density tests to women under the age of 30, but at 28, I found out that I was at risk for having osteoporosis. Knowing this, I would encourage all women to have the test regardless of race or age. Ruby Stewart Riverside, California Shared story I was so moved by "When a Pregnancy Goes Wrong" April, about the woman whose babies had twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. The article really hit home, since I also experienced this problem when I was pregnant with my own twins. My outcome was not a positive one like that of the woman in the story. I too had the surgery, but mine was not a success. I lost one twin during the surgery and the after she was born. Still, I appreciate reading about a woman who had a successful story to share. Angela Alm Salt Lake City Cheating children Thank you for the article "The New Cheating Epidemic" April, which addressed the problem of cheating in schools today. I am a high school teacher and have dealt with the challenge of cheating students for some time. Your article provided helpful tips on how to prevent and address the ongoing problem. I have also recommended your feature to some concerned parents, who were very appreciative of it, since no parent wants to believe that her child might be a participant. Thanks again for continuing to tackle the difficult topics facing children and parents today. Sandra Menz Budd Lake, New Jersey How she makes her life work LINDA RUOTOLO, 37, ELMSFORD, NEW YORK WHAT SHE DOES: "I am a wife and the mother of three children, ages 4, 5, and 7. With my kids being so close in age, their elementary school as a class mother or helping organize trips, parties, and fund-raisers. I also help my husband with his catering business, by cooking and preparing the food with him. It's crazy when we get a last-minute phone call from a client who is having a party for 30 people the next day and I'm in the middle of helping the kids with homework. But at least life is never boring. "HOW SHE FINDS BALANCE:" I make time to go to the gym, even if it means bringing my youngest daughter with me; she even has her own workout bag. Exercise relieves my stress and keeps me energized. At least once a month, a family member will watch our kids and my husband and I will take off to Atlantic City. We catch a show, have dinner, and enjoy a night (or two) without waking up with the little ones in our bed the next morning! By the time we return home, I feel refreshed and delighted to Recently my husband surprised me with a sweater and a gift certificate to my favorite clothing store. I was so touched that he knew I liked to shop there and that I needed a little pick-me-up. We enjoy snuggling on the couch when the kids are asleep and watching a movie. He jokingly pulls the old move where he yawns and stretches his arm over my shoulder, which just makes us start laughing! "WHY SHE LOVES REDBOOK" I love reading Redbook because it's a great resource for all aspects of my life: as a wife, mother, and woman. I love the party-planning tips and use them when entertaining my own guests. Redbook also focuses on important women's issues better than any other magazine does! "WISE WORDS:" Laugh out loud, as often as possible: A good sense of humor will help you make it through any tough day. People will perceive you as a happy person, and good vibes will gravitate toward you. Plus, laughing burns more I recommended your article to concerned parents. "Are you a Redbook reader? Write to us at Redbook Mail, 224 West 57th Street, New York, NY 10019; e-mail: redbook@hearst.com; fax: 212-247-1086. Include your name, address, and daytime phone number and a recent photo. Letters may be edited for clarity or length. For subscription information, call 800-888-0008 or visit us at hearstmags.com.
The supermodel and single mom talks about her relationship with Seal, how pregnancy changed her body, and why she wants to be a hands-on mom. // Picture Heidi Klum, and three words probably jump to mind: Victoria's secret model. But in the past few years, Klum has taken on a whole slew of roles that don't require silk undies or velvet bras. The German-born 31-year-old is also an entrepreneur, with her own line of baubles for fine jeweler Mouawad, a shoe line for Birkenstock, fat-free candy sold through German confectioner Katjes, and Otto, a clothing line in Germany. In December, Klum added television host to her resume with the launch of Project Runway on Bravo, a show featuring budding fashion designers competing for money to fund their own line. And with her new book, Heidi Klum's Body of Knowledge: 8 Rules of Model Behavior (to Help You Take Off on the Runway of Life), Klum can claim the title of author as well. But Heidi's most important new job is that of nasty public breakup with boyfriend Flavio Briatore last year, Klum gave birth to the couple's daughter in May 2004. Before you could say "new single mom," Klum met and started dating R &B; singer Seal, who has since moved into Klum's New York apartment-and taken on his fair share of dirty diapers. With all the recent changes in her life, we wanted to know, What are Heidi Klum's secrets to multitasking success? ON FULFILLING GOALS: "You don't always have to go through the front door to get what you want." There's a back door you can try, or you can climb a tree and try to get into the house. People always push you down; you have to be strong. For example, my modeling agency once told me, "You're a good catalog model, but you won't ever do magazines. You will never be on the cover of Vogue." They said I was too girl-next-door. And now I on my list. My book's message is about trying different things and not being afraid of getting pushed back sometimes. It's about being creative to get ahead. ON RAISING A CHILD SOLO: "I don't consider myself a single mom." We have a family. Seal sings lullabies to Leni. He makes up stuff. If she does a big fart, then he sings about the fart. Or if her poop is green, the song's about green poop. Or if she smiles, and her eyes are really blue and sparkly, then it's about blue, sparkly eyes. He helps change the diapers. He is as 100 percent as I am. He's a great, great help. He's my Superman. ON THE HOME FRONT: "It's like Babies "R" Us in my house." I have everything. I have a Bugaboo Stroller and a BabyBjrn. So many people sent gifts, and I bought a lot of stuff, changed. But it's good. I love it. ON PREGNANCY: "It's amazing what your body is capable of". I breast-feed, and my boobs got gigantic for about two weeks. I thought, I'm not going to be able to handle this. And then they just went back to normal. My body is still not the same size. But I'm not a nut about losing weight. The body does wonders. It bounces back, like stretchy rubber. ON "DIETING": "Models eat." You sit down for dinner with friends, and there's someone new there, and they say, "Wow, you chow down a lot of food! I didn't think models ate that much." It's such a clich. We just eat differently. I work out, eat well, drink water, sleep enough, and don't party too much. I might eat a big steak and a big salad, and I'll still quantity is a lot, but the quality is good. I don't eat a lot of heavy sauces and pile on the pasta and eat bread that I dip into oil. If you do that, you might as well slap the fat on your cheeks right away, because that's what does it. ON RELATIONSHIP LESSONS: "Don't try to be someone that you're not." Sooner or later, the truth will come out anyway. I've known people who have been a certain way, and then all of a sudden I was surprised by what that person turned into-or by what they always were, but they weren't that way when I met them. I was like, Wait a minute, this is not the same person that I fell in love with. Who are you? ON PARENTING: "I'm not someone who always travels everywhere with a nanny." I like to be hands-on and raise my daughter. Leni has been to Europe three times already and she gets up every three to four hours. People look when she's screaming, so I walk up and down the aisle, and I talk to her. I make funny faces. It's a whole different thing. Before, I would have a little bag with just my stuff-my purse, my phone, things like that. Now I have a huge bag with toys and bottles and diapers. ON HER EXPECTATIONS FOR LENI: "Would I ever say to Leni, 'I really want for you to be a model?' No, I would not. I wouldn't have anything against it, but she has to want it. I would be by her side if she wanted to be a model, but I don't want to put any ideas anywhere, ever. I'm here to help her get bigger and to raise her. She has to live her own life. ON BEING ONE OF THE GIRLS: "I just want to be seen as a goofy hangs." Maybe my life is, to the public, a little bit glamorous. But we change diapers the same way other people do. When we travel, we lug around bottles and burp the baby and feed her. I would love to have more kids. The one tiling I would wish for? More time. But otherwise, I'm very happy. Sidebar "I don't consider myself a single mom. We have a family. Seal sings lullabies to Leni. He helps change the diapers." //
To throw a great low-fat luau, you'll need hula dancing, tropical music, ambient torchlight and, of course, recipes. Here's how to bring everything but the lagoon into your own back yard. Photograph // This page, Guava Guava Coolers. Opposite, left, Teriyaki Beef Sticks, right, Mango Basmati Rice Salad Photograph // After World War II, Americans fell in love with a romanticized version of South Pacific Island culture. Back yards became dotted with kidney-shaped pools that mimicked blue lagoons. Trailer courts and apartment buildings took on names like "The Bali-Hai Estates." Suburban luau parties served Day-Glo cocktails in ceramic volcanoes under bamboo tiki torches staked into the ground. Mainland hotels and restaurants with Polynesian names like Kon Tiki, Kona Kei and Trader Vic's boasted indoor waterfalls and decor from the islands. Fueling the trend were James A. Michener's epic Tales of the South Pacific and its subsequent stage musical and movie, "South Pacific." Then in 1959, when Hawaii joined the United States, tourists returned from vacations with wood-carved imitate the passions of the islands. Now, Polynesian pop is back. And to help you become the tropical hostess of the season, we'll show you how to re-create island style in your own yard with Polynesian music, mood lighting, tropical drinks, island decor, hula and limbo dancing, and low-fat luau cuisine - all the basic elements of tiki chic. Our menu is based on exotic fruits found in Hawaii, with Asian and South Pacific accents and flavors. The meal is designed to be served buffet style. Everything that needs cooking is done on the grill: from the Teriyaki Beef Stick pupu to the main course to the Grilled Banana Sundae. (Be sure to throw more coals on the barbecue while you're eating dinner so the fire will last for dessert.) Finally, remember to greet all your guests with a lei to impart the true island spirit the second they step into your paradise. Aloha! Guava Guava Cooler Serves 7 THE TIKI BEVERAGE BAR WILL BE THE OASIS CHILLED TROPICAL JUICES FROM YOUR GROCERY STORE: PICK ANY WITH GUAVA, MANGO, PAPAYA, BANANA OR PINEAPPLE. (THE FROZEN FRUIT JUICES ALSO ARE GOOD CHOICES: EVEN THE PINA COLADA AND RASPBERRY RUM RUNNER FROZEN JUICE COCKTAIL CAN BE DILUTED // perfectly polynesian Photograph Fruit Salad // AND USED.) YOU CAN PREPARE THIS HOUSE SPECIAL IN A BLENDER ON DEMAND AND KEEP THE BLENDER GOING THROUGHOUT THE PARTY. ARRANGE BOWLS OF MINT LEAVES, LIME WEDGES AND SKEWERED TROPICAL FRUITS ON YOUR BEVERAGE BAR FOR GARNISHING. AND DO N'T FORGET THE PAPER UMBRELLAS! 1 cup guava nectar, chilled 1 cup cubed fresh pineapple, chilled 2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 1 tablespoon sugar 6-8 mint leaves 1/2 teaspoon imitation coconut extract 1 cup light rum (optional) 3 cups sparkling water, chilled Process guava nectar, pineapple, lime juice, sugar, mint leaves and coconut extract (and rum if you like) in a blender until smooth. To serve, pour 1/2 cup juice over ice in a glass, then stir in 2/3 cup without rum): 40 calories, 0 percent fat (0 grams), 98 percent carbohydrate, 2 percent protein. Teriyaki Beef Sticks Serves 10 PUPU PLATTERS OF HAWAIIAN APPETIZERS (SUVH AS THIS AND THE SLAMON SUMMER ROLLS) SHOULD BE POSITIONED NEAR THE BEVERAGE BAR. ALSO SET OUT STORE-BOUGHT ITEMS SUCH AS TARO CHIPS AND JAPANESE RICE CRACKERS NEXT TO THE APPETIZERS. THE REST OF THE MEAL CAN BE SERVED BUFFET-STYLE ON A LARGER TABLE. 1 pound lean boneless top round steak, 1 inch thick 5 tablespoons light soy sauce 2 tablespoons honey 2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger 1 tablespoon minced fresh garlic 1 tablespoon vegetable oil 20 8- to 10-inch wooden skewers, soaked in water for 30 minutes Place meat in freezer 10-20 minutes or until partially frozen. Combine soy sauce, honey, ginger, garlic and oil in a medium bowl. Cut meat across the grain into 1/4-inch-thick slices. Pour soy sauce mixture over meat and toss well. Cover and refrigerate at least 3 hours or up to overnight. Prepare evenly. Place grill rack over a solid bed of hot coals (they're hot enough when you can hold your hand just above the grill rack only 2-3 seconds). Arrange all skewers on grill rack; grill meat until brown on both sides, about 5 minutes. Nutritional analysis per serving (2 skewers): 100 calories, 27 percent fat (3 grams), 16 percent carbohydrate, 57 percent protein. Salmon Summer Rolls Serves 12 THESE CAN BE ASSEMBLED UP TO 8 HOURS BEFORE SERVING. 1/4 cup firmly packed light brown sugar 1/4 cup fresh lime juice 1/4 cup light soy sauce 2 teaspoons Asian chili sauce 3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger 1 1/2 cups hot cooked white rice 3/4 pound center-cut salmon fillet (3/4 inch thick), with the skin removed At least 12 (6 1/2-inch-diameter) rice-paper rounds (a k a spring roll wrappers) 3/4 cup shredded romaine lettuce 1/3 cup packed fresh cilantro leaves, minced 1/3 cup packed fresh mint leaves, minced 1/4 cup chopped unsalted peanuts Combine brown and ginger in a medium bowl; stir until sugar melts. Evenly spread hot cooked rice in a shallow dish. Drizzle 3 tablespoons brown sugar-lime juice marinade over rice and mix well, then again spread rice in an even layer and let cool. Cut salmon into 12 rectangular pieces, about 3 inches long and 1/3-1/2 inch wide. Place pieces in a heavyduty resealable bag. Pour remaining marinade into bag. Seal bag, and turn over several times to evenly coat salmon with marinade. Refrigerate 30 minutes. Arrange salmon pieces on a rack in a shallow broiling pan. Broil 4 inches from heat 1 1/2-2 1/2 minutes or until salmon loses its raw color. (You do not need to turn salmon pieces.) Working with 2 rice-paper rounds at a time, arrange on a cutting board. Brush both sides of each round with water, and let stand a few minutes until softened. If the wrappers are moistened with too much water, they will disintegrate; if they are too dry, the (If you have trouble with sheets breaking, lay a second rice-paper round on top, and brush with water.) Arrange 1 heaping tablespoon of lettuce in a strip about the size of a piece of salmon on each moistened rice-paper round, placing it about 2 inches from the edge nearest you. Top with a small amount of cilantro and mint. Mound about 1 1/2 tablespoons rice mixture on a piece of cooked salmon, smoothing rice evenly with your hands. Place on top of lettuce and herbs. Sprinkle with 1 teaspoon peanuts. Fold edge of rice-paper wrapper nearest you over the salmon stack. Fold each side over and roll the rice paper tightly into a cylinder. Transfer roll to a platter. Repeat the procedure with the remaining rice paper rounds and ingredients. Cover sushi rolls with plastic wrap, then a damp dish towel, and refrigerate until ready to serve. Nutritional analysis per serving (1 roll): 100 calories, 27 percent fat (3 grams), 43 percent carbohydrate, Chicken Wings Serves 8 1 14 1/2-ounce can whole tomatoes, undrained and crushed 2 cups diced fresh mango or papaya 2/3 cup mango chutney 3 cloves garlic, minced 1/4 cup finely chopped onion 1 tablespoon cider vinegar 1 tablespoon unsulfured molasses 1 tablespoon curry powder 8 chicken wings (1 1/2-2 pounds) 40 large shrimp (about 1 1/4 pounds) 24 (10-inch) wooden skewers, soaked in water for 30 minutes 15 green onions (including tops), cut into 2-inch lengths Condiments: sliced green onion, minced cilantro, minced peanuts or macadamia nuts, finely diced avocado, sliced banana (coated with a little lemon juice to prevent browning), lime wedges, crushed red chilies, toasted coconut, sliced pineapple Puree tomatoes, mango, chutney, garlic, onion, vinegar, molasses and curry powder in a blender or food processor until smooth. Pour into a heavy medium saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium heat, stirring constantly; reduce heat to low and simmer 15 minutes. Let cool. You can refrigerate remaining sauce in a covered container for up to 3 days. Place chicken wings in a large resealable plastic bag. Pour 2/3 cup reserved sauce into bag, seal it and turn to coat chicken with sauce. Shell and devein shrimp, keeping tails intact. Place in another resealable plastic bag. Pour remaining sauce into bag; seal and turn to coat with sauce. Refrigerate chicken and shrimp in bags of marinade for 4 hours or overnight, turning bags occasionally. Prepare barbecue fire. Remove chicken from bag. Thread chicken wings on 8 wooden skewers (1 wing per skewer), splaying each wing as widely as possible. On a pair of parallel wooden skewers, thread 5 shrimp alternately with 5 onion pieces; repeat with remaining shrimp and green onion, using 7 more pairs of skewers. Position grill rack 4-6 inches over a solid bed of medium-hot coals (you should be able to hold your hand at grill level for 4-5 seconds). Arrange chicken skewers on rack. Grill knife pierces thickest part of wing. Grill shrimp skewers 3-6 minutes or until shrimp turn pink, turning occasionally. Arrange skewers on a serving platter; serve with remaining sauce (at room temperature) and an assortment of condiments. Nutritional analysis per serving (1 chicken and 1 shrimp skewer): 340 calories, 21 percent fat (8 grams), 36 percent carbohydrate, 43 percent protein. Mango Basmati Rice Salad Serves 8 THE RICE SHOULD BE COOLED IN A WIDE, SHALLOW BOWL BY FOLDING IN THE DRESSING. 1/2 cup thinly sliced green onion 1/3 cup minced poblano chile or Hungarian wax chile 1 cup orange juice 1/3 cup rice wine vinegar 1 teaspoon sugar 1/2 teaspoon salt 1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 1 1/2 cups diced firm, ripe mango (about 2 mangoes) Stir rice into a large bowl of cool water, enough to cover the rice. Drain. Repeat several times until water is no longer cloudy. Drain rice. Combine rice and 4 cups water in a heavy medium saucepan. Bring to to low. Cook 15 minutes or until rice is just tender; do not stir. Evenly spread hot rice in a large, shallow bowl or baking dish. Stir sliced green onion and minced chile into rice. Mix orange juice, vinegar, sugar, salt and nutmeg in a bowl. Drizzle over rice, stirring with a wooden spoon to coat rice with dressing. Fold in mango. Serve at room temperature. Nutritional analysis per serving (1 cup): 229 calories, 2 percent fat (0.5 grams), 91 percent carbohydrate, 7 percent protein. THE LUSCIOUS PINK, INTENSELY SWEET, FLOWERY FLAVOR OF GUAVA IS THE HIGHLIGHT OF THIS SALAD. CHOOSE BLEMISH-FREE FRUIT, AS YELLOW AND AS SOFT AS YOU CAN FIND. IF YOU CAN FIND ONLY FIRM FRUIT, RIPEN AT ROOM TEMPERATURE OR IN A CLOSED PAPER BAG. THIS COULD TAKE FROM 12-24 HOURS, SO CHECK THE GUAVAS OCCASIONALLY. TO PREPARE, PEEL WITH A VEGETABLE PEELER, AND SLICE; OR YOU CAN HALVE THEM, AND IF YOU CA N'T FIND GUAVA, SUBSTITUTE 4 APRICOTS OR 2 MANGOES. 3 tablespoons orange juice 3 tablespoons rice wine vinegar 3 tablespoons honey 1 tablespoon vegetable oil 1 1/2 teaspoons Asian chili sauce 1 tablespoon grated fresh ginger 4 ripe guavas 2 ripe papayas 10 cups mixed baby lettuces or torn leaf lettuce 2 tablespoons chopped roasted macadamia nuts Combine orange juice, rice wine vinegar, honey, oil, chili sauce and grated ginger in a jar. Cover and shake dressing to blend. Peel guavas and papayas with a vegetable peeler. Cut guavas into slices and set aside. Cut papayas in half lengthwise; scoop out seeds and dice fruit. Shake salad dressing again. Pour dressing over lettuce in a large bowl and toss well. Add guava, papaya and nuts to salad. Toss gently. Nutritional analysis per serving (2/3 cup): 120 calories, 30 percent fat (4 grams), 60 percent carbohydrate, 10 percent protein. Grilled Banana Sundaes Serves 8 SPRINKLE A TEASPOON OF THE NUTS AND TOASTED LOT OF FLAVOR FOR JUST A BIT OF SINFUL INDULGENCE. 1 8-ounce carton low-fat vanilla-flavored yogurt 3 tablespoons honey 2 teaspoons lemon juice 1 cup thawed frozen light whipped topping 4 large, ripe bananas 1/3 cup honey 1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 4 cups (I quart) frozen vanilla nonfat yogurt Toppings: minced crystallized ginger, finely chopped macadamia nuts, toasted coconut Stir together yogurt, honey and lemon juice in a medium bowl. Gently fold in whipped topping. Cover and refrigerate up to 4 hours before serving. Peel bananas and cut each in half lengthwise. Cut each half crosswise on a diagonal into 3 pieces. Heat honey and cinnamon in a saucepan over low heat until very fluid, or place honey and cinnamon in a shallow bowl and microwave 30 seconds. Toss bananas with honey mixture until well coated. Prepare barbecue fire. Arrange banana pieces crosswise on grill rack, positioned over medium-hot coals. Grill until marked on bottom (about 30-60 seconds each side). Arrange bananas in serving bowls. Spoon 1/2 1/4 cup lemonyogurt mixture and sprinkle with desired toppings. Nutritional analysis per serving (1 sundae with I teaspoon chopped macadamia nuts): 312 calories, 23 percent fat (8 grams), 71 percent carbohydrate, 6 percent protein. Nutritional analysis for entire meal: 1,241 calories, 19 percent fat (26.5 grams), 59 percent carbohydrate, 22 percent protein. Resources: You can order tiki statues, lamps, hula dolls, mugs, grass skirts, tropical music, drink recipes, et al., from these Web sites: Tikibones@aol. com; www.coconuts.net/tiki; TikiKing@ aol.com; www.campingworld com; and www. wildsscene. com. Author Affiliation Debby Maugans Nakos is a food writer in Birmingham, Ala. //
They're the first frontier of passion - and the last area you think to pamper. So give your lips some love this Valentine's Day. Color: Dare to Wear It Welcome to the season of deep, dark, provocative lip color. There's little that's more glamorous Photograph // nd seductive than lusciously red lips - or this season's high-impact, ultra-romantic (yet surprisingly wearable) plummy pout, Even if you've shied away from vivid hues in the past, this season you can pull them of with ease. New formulations that go on smooth and sheer instead of cakey and opaque - a modern, uncluttered way of wearing color - are good reasons to give high-voltage lips another go. "The winter months are a great time to wear color on the lips," says makeup artist Bobbi Brown of the eponymous cosmetics and skin-care line. "The trick is to wear shades that are bright, not muddy," she advises. And to keep the look from being ampy, make the color on eyes and the rest of you do opt for this season's smoky eyes, go lighter on the lips.) Another trick is to apply lip color with your finger "Sometimes you can get too muc color with a brush or straight from a ube," says Guy Lento, national director of makeup for Chanel. "You'll have more control over the level of coverage when you use your fingertip to apply it." Lento adds that you can also ease the transition to a more-intense hue by blotting off any excess color from your lips, then adding a gloss to tone it down. (Taking the plum plu ige: Aveda Lip Gloss Minus Lanolin in Purple Harmony, a swirl of purple, soft pink and glazed white that combine to form a violet shimmer; and M.A.C Smoove, a gold-flecked futuristic purple. Beguilingly wearable reds: Bobbi Brown Lip Color in Scarlet; Clarins Lip Glaze in Garnet, a wet wash of deep red; and BeneFit gloss in Groovy, a vivid red shade rendered surprisingly earable because is meant to stay on forever, but you can increase its longevity, according to Lento, by "staining" your lips: Gently rub pigment in with your finger to create a base, blot, then add another layer of color. Priming your pout with lip pencil also gives lipstick a base to cling to. (Try Lorac eggplant-colored Lip Pencil #14 or M.A.C Spice Lip Liner.) New York City makeup artist Liz Michael advocates freshening up fading lipstick (and simultaneously countering dryness and buildup) by smoothing lip balm over your wilting lip color instead of touching up from the tube. (For high-tech help, Remede Hydralock Lip Balm contains ingredients that "lock on" lipstick; Softlips Undercover Lipstick Primer increases lipstick's moisture content to prevent cracking and fading, which is especially helpful under long-wearing formulas that tend to be more drying.) Photograph 1. Clarins Garnet Lip Glaze 2. M.A.C Spice Lip Liner 3. L'Oreal Rouge Pulp in Icy 4. Bobbi Brown Lip Color in Scarlet 5. Origins Sheer Fig Lip Gloss 7. BeneFit Gloss in Groovy 8. MAC Smoove 9. Aveda Purple Harmony Lip Gloss 10. Bobbe Joy Shimmer to Sheer Custom Lip Gloss Kit // Gloss Grows Up A far cry from the gooey concoctions of yesteryear, today's lip glosses are chic, multidimensional, and add an instant sexy glow to the face (think candlelight on demand). But the age-old trick still holds: A concentrated dab of gloss in the center of your lower lip is a foolproof path to a sexy, fuller-looking pout. (Glam gleamers: Origins Lip Gloss in Sheer Fig, a go-anywhere gold-spiked nude; L'Oreal Rouge Pulp Liquid Lipcolour in Icy, a pale metallic shimmer; and the ultimate Valentine's Day must-have Bobbe Joy Shimmer to Sheer Custom Lip Gloss Kits, delectable palettes of 6 chocolate-scented toasty pinks, mauves and mochas.) Smooth Moves No lipstick looks good on chapped, dried-out lips an increasing problem as the mercury and humidity drop - so use of moisturepreserving lip balms are a protection. "Every lipstick provides some sort of physical barrier against UV rays, which is probably why cancers of the lip are so much rarer in women than they are in men," says Mary Lupo, M.D., clinical associate professor of dermatology at Tulane University in New Orleans. "Still, it's a good idea to wear a lipstick with an SPF - or wear an SPF-containing lip balm as a topcoat over your regular lipstick." Remember, licking your lips is taboo: "It's the worst thing to do when your lips are dry, since it causes evaporation of fluids. Use a hydrating lipstick or lip balm instead," says Lupo, who recommends nonmedicated balms since they're more emollient than those which contain potentially drying phenol and menthol. (Balmy weather busters: Blistex Herbal Answer SPF 15, Almay Stay Smooth Medicated Lipcolor SPF 25, and Nuxe Honey Lip Balm.) The best way to avoid flaking, wrinkly lips is to go cold turkey on such habits as and of course - smoking. Exfoliating creams for the lips containing sloughing agents like AHAs are another way to both decrease flakiness and minimize tiny crinkles and wrinkles, especially around the mouth. "Just don't expect miracles," says Lupo. And proceed with caution. "These products can be irritating and drying if you have sensitive skin," Lupo says. Make sure you test on a tiny area first. (Try these flake fighters: Clinique All About Lips with salicylic acid; Laura Mercier Lip Silk with four types of AHAs; or Diane Young Coneflower Lipline Firmer.) Suzanne B. Gleason is a frequent contributor to Shape. Photograph Today's lip glosses add an instant sexy glow to the face. //
Don't be shy: Speaking up could save your life. // The less time your annual gynecology checkup takes, the better - breast exam, pelvic, Pap smear and you're gone. Wait - not so fast! Maybe you should take a few minutes longer with the gynecologist. You may think all doctors are in a rush to get to the next patient, but most want to give their patients the best care. However, doctors can't address what you don't tell them. "The 20s and 30s are basically a healthy time of life, and young women tend to come in to the gynecologist's either to get a form filled out or to get a new prescription for contraception and then leave," says Ann Davis, M.D., assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Harvard University and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. What gets lost in the quick shuffle are potentially crucial health (and happiness) issues, from HIV testing to sexual satisfaction. Here are 10 top questions that your gynecologist would love to discuss. Should I be tested for sexually transmitted diseases? "I wish patients would ask and be completely frank about risktaking sexual activity, which really begins with anything other than abstinence or a long-term, monogamous relationship," says Jill Maura Rabin, M.D., chief of ambulatory care and head of urogynecology at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, N.Y. "We want to be able to educate them about how to keep themselves alive and safe." // Besides being on the lookout for symptoms of chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, pelvic infection and more, that might also mean: increasing the frequency of Pap smears if so-called high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV, the virus that causes genital warts) is detected, since it predisposes you to cervical cancer; annual HIV tests (condoms are not fail-proof AIDS prevention, Rabin points out, because 13 percent of them will break or leak); and hepatitis C tests in case you've been exposed through your own or a partner's drug use 1992, when donated blood was not routinely screened for the disease. 2. What about a different contraceptive? Just because a contraceptive's worked for you in the past doesn't mean it's still the best choice, Rabin notes. If you've used condoms only, for instance, you can ask about going on the pill or another hormonal method for contraceptive backup. Or, if the pill causes symptoms you're unhappy with, look into a different formulation and balance of hormones. If you're terrible about remembering to take the pill on schedule, ask about the new, virtually goof-proof contraceptive patch. 3. Should I have a prescription for the "morning-after pill"? "Having either an undated prescription or the actual medication on hand for emergency contraception is an excellent idea," Davis suggests. Note, however, that this is a lousy choice as a regular contraceptive method, cautions Gerald F. Joseph Jr., M.D., medical director for women's services at St. John's Regional Health it can be one huge headache-saver. And in cases of rape (date, spousal or other), while the ideal is for a woman to go to an emergency room for help and to call the police, not every woman in fact does, and either way, knowing you have the means to prevent a resultant pregnancy can eliminate at least one worry, Joseph notes. 4. What can I do about incontinence? "One thing we know young women are not bringing up is incontinence," Davis reports. Up to 20 percent of women experience urinary incontinence at some point in their teens, 20s and 30s, according to Rabin. But only about half of women of any age with the problem raise the issue with their doctors. Childbirth, and the weakening of the urethra's sphincter muscles that can result, accounts for some stress incontinence, where external pressure on the bladder (such as with a sneeze or cough) causes a little leakage. But more common among young women is even though the bladder isn't full. The problem can stem from a complex process in which artificial sweeteners, stress, caffeine, iced drinks, hot peppers or other triggers cause nerves governing the bladder to set off a spasm, making it contract. Treatment - avoiding triggers, "retraining" your bladder, Kegel exercises, medication and other approaches works 80 percent of the time, so it's definitely worth putting shyness aside to ask. 5. Why are my periods irregular? It's perfectly normal for a woman's cycle to fluctuate occasionally: Stress - even small changes in routine, diet and exercise - can throw a minor monkey wrench into the works. "Menstrual irregularity is something young women tend not to pay much attention to beyond making sure they're not pregnant," Joseph says. "But even with a negative pregnancy test, a missed period or spotting could indicate a dangerous ectopic pregnancy." Irregular bleeding - what you might mistake for an out-of -- sync or especially light cervix or uterus, or a panoply of other problems including thyroid disease, endometriosis, fibroids and hormonal disorders. "Furthermore," Joseph notes, "if you're going along hardly ever ovulating or having periods, we're concerned not only because this could be a symptom of anorexia or polycystic ovary syndrome, but also because the lack of estrogen could be impairing your ability to store up the bone mass that will be crucial later in life, or you could even be losing bone already." Don't panic - most of these symptoms usually mean nothing - but do ask. 6. What can I do about sexual problems? // Hard to imagine a bigger squirm factor, for patients and some physicians, than with this question. But it's precisely because your gynecologist is a good bet to have some answers that it's worth asking." A lot of women are reticent to bring up sexual difficulties, which I certainly can understand, but most problems can be answered or at least culprits easiest to identify for low libido among young women are medications - for instance, many of the most widely used anti-depression and anti-anxiety drugs can chill sexual response, and some women report decreased libido from oral contraceptives. Discomfort or pain during intercourse can lead to sexual problems, and the underlying cause can range from serious medical issues such as endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease to something as simple as a yeast infection, sensitivity to spermicide or cyclic fluctuations in vaginal lubrication. And if he or she can't find a physical cause, your gynecologist is a smart choice to initiate a referral to a sex therapist. 7. Can I talk to the nurse? Your gynecologist is not the only one in the office of whom it's worth asking questions. "One of the best resources, and one that patients don't utilize well, is the office nurse," Davis observes. "Office nurses are usually very experienced, and a lot can be handled directly through them." The best case is when, with whom you develop a good relationship and who knows that if you say it's a urinary-tract infection that can not wait, it's a urinary-tract infection that can not wait. With a less simpatico nurse, or a more anonymous one from a larger practice, you can still get valuable advice about how concerned to be about a certain symptom, how to treat run-ofthe-mill ills (menstrual cramps, morning sickness), what the standard instructions are for medications and to which specialists your doctor usually refers patients. Nurses often can take care of pregnancy tests or UTI screens without your spending the time or money for a doctor's visit. And if you have a long laundry list of concerns, the preliminary chat with the nurse is an ideal time to go over them and winnow them down to the most important to bring into the examining room. 8. I was abused or assaulted (sexually or otherwise) in the past - what effect does that have on my health? "Statistics on the just astounding," Joseph says. For example, according to the Rape, Abuse &; Incest National Network, someone in the United States is sexually assaulted (including rape and attempted rape) every two minutes; 90 percent are female and 80 percent are under age 30. There could well be lasting physical effects to take into account, but more insidious are the psychological scars that manifest themselves as physical ills. "A young woman who has been traumatized by such an event tends to hold in her anxiety or depression about it, and then to somatize those feelings - that is, develop physical symptoms, frequently pelvic pain, that reflect her mental pain," Joseph says. As troubling or uncomfortable as it may be to speak up, mentioning past sexual trauma can be extremely helpful to your gynecologist in making a diagnosis, Joseph points out. "It's very difficult to get these kinds of histories from patients, so sometimes they've been seen by several doctors, and numerous tests and procedures found. But if a physician is aware of a past problem like abuse or assault, then instead of getting involved exclusively with the physical aspect, he or she can also perhaps counsel the patient directly, or refer her to a psychotherapist, and meanwhile at least prevent more procedures and tests from being done." // 9. What were my test results? Sure, most doctors have a protocol in place to notify patients of positive test results. They also have protocols to keep appointments from getting mixed up, charts from getting misfiled, etc., and you know how foolproof those aren't. "Ask what the policy about patient notification is," Rabin recommends. "Many offices send a note to patients no matter what - that they need follow-up or that they got an allclear - but others have a" we'll let you know only if something's wrong' policy. In the latter case, it's fine to ask that they notify you either way and how long you might back if you don't. "To make sure you remember, put a note on your calendar at the same time you schedule your appointment to call three weeks later to follow up on test results. 10. How does smoking affect my sexual and reproductive health? Of course, like other doctors, gynecologists want you to quit smoking for lots of health reasons. But smoking has a direct, potentially devastating, impact in their bailiwick too. For starters, smoking may limit your choice of contraception. Smokers, especially those older than 35, aren't ideal candidates for the pill because of their increased risk for potentially fatal blood clots, heart attack and stroke. More important, smoking acts as an immune blocker, Joseph explains, which increases the chance of getting cervical cancer (and probably also means that HPV is more virulent among smokers) and may make smokers more susceptible to other infectious diseases. Also, smoking decreases fertility and accelerates the onset of menopause. Among the risks to smokers and miscarriage, bleeding problems, premature delivery, stillbirth, low birth weight (which raises the odds of neonatal death by a factor of 40) and sudden infant death (the latter two to four times more likely than for nonsmokers' babies). Children of mothers who smoked during pregnancy have higher rates of brain damage, cerebral palsy and behavioral disorders. Nothing would make a physician happier than spending a few minutes discussing ways to help you quit. So, ask! You'll feel better - and live healthier - if you do. Sidebar WHAT YOUR OB/GYN wishes you would tell her Sidebar When it's your gynecologist asking you the questions, please, they all plead, please have the following information ready: The start date of your last period Asking the date of your last period should elicit a number, not a ballpark estimate." It always frustrates me a bit when women don't keep track of their cycles, then suddenly there's a problem and they have no idea when their last M.D., medical director for women's services at St. John's Regional Health Center in Springfield, Mo. "That information can be so important - for a missed period, pregnancy, tubal pregnancy - having a good menstrual history can start Sidebar the doctor thinking in the right realm." Your medical history Know exactly when it was that you had that ovarian cyst or which oral contraceptive it was that gave you headaches. No one expects you to carry all this in your head - just in your hand. Keep a written medical history, and then bring it to appointments. Your family's medical history "Women will say, 'My cousin has some weird disease that her kid has too, but I don't really know what it is,'" says Ann Davis, M.D., assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Harvard University and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. "Well, get the information, so that if you become pregnant, your obstetrician can do the proper writer living in Chevy Chase, Md. //
No time to get away? No budget for a pricey trip? No worries. These 8 moves from spa fitness experts sculpt your entire body - abs, butt, thighs, everything. Photograph Photograph // What is it about going to a spa that gives you the motivation to try different classes, challenge yourself like never before and really get to know how your body works? It could be all the cash you just shelled out. But more likely than not, it's the fact you have zero demands on your time and a bevy of trainers at your beck and call. To help you jumpstart your home routine, Shape asked top spa pros for their best get-firm-fast moves. Some strategically placed stretches give you that true "aah" spa feeling - and our 14-day calendar shows you how to fit it all in without stressing out. Now all you have to do is find someone to give you that massage... YOUR SHAPE-UP PLAN The schedule Do up to 3 sets of each move (unless otherwise noted) in order 2-3 times a week first 4 moves and save the last 4 for later. Warm up with 5 minutes of easy cardio. Customize It To make this workout easier, do only 2 sets of each exercise. To make it harder, turn it into a circuit: Do 1 set of each move, in the order shown, without resting. Finish the circuit with 5-10 minutes of cardio, then repeat the entire series twice. What you need You'll use a BOSU Balance Trainer, a medicine ball, a resistance band, a step bench or sturdy chair, a pair of 3 - to 5-pound dumbbells and a mat. Find them all at sHapeupshop.com. (see each move for easy ways to modify if you don't have all the gear.) Cardio Rx Do 30-60 minutes of cardio 5 or 6 days a week. Photograph // 1 BOSU PLANK STRENGTHENS ABS, CHEST, SHOULDERS, BACK, LEGS AND BUTT Why It works "This takes the plank, which Is an excellent core exercise, to the next your workouts and dally activities." -Francine Cibottl, trainer, The Peninsula Spa, Chicago How to do it Kneel in front of the BOSU (or use a wobble board or two pillows) with the flat side up and center your forearms on it, palms facing each other, elbows aligned under shoulders. Extend left leg behind you, toes down A. Pull abs in, then extend right leg next to left B. Your body should be in a straight line from head to heels. Hold here for 30 seconds (that's 1 set); rest for 45 seconds, then repeat up to 3 times, adding 10 seconds each time. WIN! a two-night stay at The Peninsula Hotel-Chicago! SEE PAGE 215. 2 BOSU MOVING LUNGE STRENGTHENS LEGS, BUTT, UPPER HIPS AND INNER THIGHS Why It works "Adding an element of Instability with the BOSU Increases the sculpting factor for the thighs." -Kent Burden, a mind-body fitness consultant, Ojai Valley Inn &; Spa, Ojai, Calif. How of the BOSU with the dome side up, hands on hips. Slowly lunge to the left and place left foot on the center of the BOSU. Bend left knee, aligning it with left ankle, and keep right leg straight A. Staying in this lowered position, shift your weight to the right leg, bending right knee and straightening left leg B. Shift weight back to left leg again, then push off left foot to return to start position. Do 10-12 reps, then switch legs to complete set. WIN! a three-night stay at the Ojai Valley Inn &; Spa. SEE PAGE 215. Photograph Photograph // 3 MEDICINE-BALL BOUNCE STRENGTHENS ABS Why it works "It challenges your coordination while also adding resistance to your ab workout, a key factor In speeding up the firming process." -Becky Franklin, director of group exercise, The Houstonlan hotel, Club &; Spa, Houston How to do It Holding a bounceable medicine ball (or any ball that bounces) with both hands in front of your, feet flat and slightly wider than your shoulders. Contract your abs and lean back a few inches, keeping your back straight and chest lifted A. Sit up, bounce the ball between your legs once and catch it. Lower torso again, rotate upper body to the right B. Bounce ball once beside right hip, catch it, then repeat to the left to complete 1 rep. Do 8-12 reps. WIN! a four-night stay at the Houstonlan hotel, Club &; Spa. SEE PAGE 215. 4 YOUR "AAH" MOMENT DROP-KNEE TWIST STRETCHES SHOULDERS, SPINE EXTENSORS AND HIPS Why It works "Dropping your knees to the side makes this stretch safer for the spine (there's not as much rotation)." -Cathy Genzier, yoga Instructor, Willow Stream Spa at the Fairmont Scottscdale Princess Scottodale, Artz. How to do it Sit with knees bent, feet slightly wider than shoulders, palms on the ground behind you, fingers pointing forward A. Drop knees to right and turn torso to right as. Keep knees down and continue walking both hands behind you until upper body is almost square to the ground (the amount you can twist will depend on your range of motion) B. Hold this stretch for 10-30 seconds, then place one palm on top of the other, and lower your forehead onto your hands. Move left leg back for a deeper stretch and hold again for up to 30 seconds; switch sides and repeat WIN! a three-night stay at the Fairmont Scottsdale Princess. SEE PAGE 215. Photograph Photograph // 5 BAND STEP-UP STRENGTHENS LEGS, BUTT, REAR SHOULDERS AND UPPER BACK Why it works "It prompts your core to stabilize you because your upper body is working at the same time as the lower body." -Barry Shingle, director of guest activities, Rancho La Puerta, Tecate, Mexico How to do it Holding a resistance band in both hands, stand facing an elevated step bench or a sturdy knee-height chair. Step left foot onto the bench and raise arms in front of up on band so it's barely taut. Step right foot onto bench as you bring arms out to sides, squeezing shoulder blades together B. Return to start position, bringing arms to center again. Repeat, leading with right leg to complete 1 rep. Do 10-12 reps. WIN! a weeklong stay at Rancho La Puerta. SEE PAGE 215 Photograph // 6 BALLET LUNGE STRENGTHENS LEGS, BUTT AND FRONT SHOULDERS Why It works "Incorporating the arm mows challenges your coordination and saves time since you're working several muscles at one." -Pauline Gardner, fitness instructor, Avanyu Spa at The Equinox Retort &; Spa, Manchester Village, Vt. How to do it Holding a light dumbbell in each hand, stand with the heel of your left foot against the instep of your right foot, palms facing legs A. Lunge with left foot as you raise your arms to shoulder level, palms facing down B. Step back to start position. Do 5 reps; switch legs to complete set WIN! a three-night 215. 7 PUSH-UP SIDE PLANK STRENGTHENS ABS, CHEST, TRICEPS, SHOULDERS AND BACK Why it works "This exercise activates almost all the muscles in your upper body." -Alyssa Gitto, fitness trainer, The Peaks Resort &; Golden Door Spa, Telluride, Colo. How to do it Get in push-up position on the ground on hands and toes, so your body is level from head to heels A. Lower your chest toward the ground. Push up, then rotate entire body to the left, turning onto the outside of your right foot and the inside of your left (or stack feet). Make sure your right shoulder is aligned over your right wrist and extend your left arm toward the sky. Look up toward your hand B. Rotate back to starting position and repeat to the right, to complete 1 rep. Do 5-8 reps. Photograph Photograph // 8 YOUR "AAH" MOMENT AROUND THE WORLD STRETCHES BACK, OBLIQUES, CHEST AND INNER THIGHS Why it works "It helps open up all feitness manager, Red Mountain Spa, Ivins, Utah How to do it Stand with feet wide and squat down until your thighs are almost parallel to the ground, knees aligned over ankles. Place your right hand on right thigh and reach left arm up to the right A. Hold for 10-30 seconds, then repeat stretch to left side. Slowly bring arms wide behind you and overhead. Interlace your fingers, lower arms to shoulder height in front of you and stretch forward, founding your spine and pulling your shoulder blades apart B. Straighten and repeat sequence 2-4 times. WIN! a four-night stay at Red Mountain Spa. SEE PAGE 215. Sidebar WIN ONE OF 7 LUXURY SPA TRIPS! A free vacation might be just the incentive you need to make time to get away. Turn the page for details. // This two-week plan shows you how to fit your new workout (and calorie-blasting cardio) into your real-life schedule. Sidebar 14 DAYS TO A BRANDNEW YOU //
Simple lifestyle and eating habit changes can be made over time with all the benefits of proper nutrition. Small changes allow for better long-term adjustments. The United States Department of Agriculture's (USDA) updated Food Guide Pyramid is the best source for meal planning -- whole grain breads and cereals, an abundance of fruits and vegetables, low fat milk and cheeses, legumes, lean meats, fish and poultry -- are all included in the overall plan. Including selections from the tip of the pyramid, the fats and sweets group, should be used moderately. However, to deny yourself the occasional treat will only cause you to eat more of something else, without satisfying the sweet craving yet, having more calorie intake than if you had the sweet in the first place. To begin implementing the changes, begin by concentrating on a few foods you are willing to substitute or limit, such as oven-baked tortilla chips instead of oil-fried chips, non-fat fruit flavored yogurt as an ice cream topping instead of syrups or whipped cream. There are new healthy products coming reduced-fat or fat-free, low or no sodium, sugar-free or high in fiber. When preparing your grocery list, do it when you are not feeling hungry and include all the main pyramid food groups. When shopping, do so along the store's walls where meats, dairy, breads, fruits and vegetables are located. Some staples, such as pasta, rice or couscous, are located in center aisles along with nutrient-robbed processed foods. Label reading has become easier with the updated "Nutrition Facts" panel located on most foods. Take advantage of the label by substituting foods higher in calories or sodium with products which are lower in these areas. Children should also participate in the family's dietary changes as it will affect them as well. Pack their lunch bags with sandwiches made with whole-wheat bread, reduced-fat cheese and sliced vegetables. Instead of fat-filled cookies, try using raisins as a substitute for chocolate chips or cookies sweetened with fruit juices instead of sugars. At the movies, popcorn and soda are munchie but with additional-ingredients such as salt and butter, you might as well have a candy bar instead. There are alternatives available. Ask the snack shop personnel to custom pop an unsalted and unbuttered batch of popcorn. They are more than happy to accomodate their nutrition-aware customers. Other moviegoers may enjoy this choice along with you. For the soda alternative, many chain theaters, such as Cineplex Odeon, are now carrying fruit juices and bottled water in most locations. By the end of 1995, nearly 1,000 of their facilities will be offering juices. Restaurants are also aware of the growing need for menu options and diversity tailored for a healthy diet. Opt for fish, chicken and beef dishes which are grilled, broiled, steamed, poached or roasted instead of those which are breaded or fried. Dressings can be had on the side as a dip for salad vegetables rather than drowning them needlessly in extra calories and fat. Vegetables as main dishes have evolved to include something for every palate. Crisp stir-fried popularity and in overall taste. The trick for overcoming bland dishes is to add fresh spices and herbs which bring out the flavor of food. If you're well prepared for meal planning, you and your family will be sure to get all the daily recommended vitamins and minerals. There is no need to change your entire eating style or taste. The following recommendations by the American Dietetic Association (ADA) will enable you to alter those favorite family recipes into healthy up-to-date feasts: * Vegetables such as broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage or spinach should be cooked no longer than four minutes. Any longer will cause them to become mushy and undesirable. * When sauteeing or stir-frying, use chicken or vegetable broth, flavored vinegars or fruit juices as tasty substitutes for butter or oil. * Instead of fat-filled cream sauce for chicken or fish meals, try using plain non-fat yogurt seasoned with dill * Look through ethnic cookbooks for taste variations. For example, combine basil and garlic for an Italian taste, oregano and an Asian flavor or curry for a taste of India. * These subtle changes may seem ordinary but you will be surprised at what a difference these few alterations make to your overall health. Remember that balance, variety and moderation make a diet healthful. Subtle, long-term changes in eating habits will produce results which remain for a lifetime. HOW MUCH DO YOU REALLY KNOW ABOUT NUTRITION 1) What is a nutritious low-fat food? a) Pretzels -- b) Apples -- c) Air popped popcorn -- d) All 2) On the new food label, the "Daily Value" gives you a general idea of a food's nutrient contribution to a reference diet of: a) 2,000 calories -- b) 1,500 calories -- c) 2,500 calories 3) Which of the following types of ethnic foods offer healthful, low-fat choices? a) Chinese -- b) Italian -- c) Mexican -- d) All 4) What is the key to a healthful eating style? a) Variety -- b 5) What is the best way to cut back on the fat in the food you eat at home? a) Buy only foods that provide less than 30 percent of calories from fat b) Eliminate all fat from your diet c) Reduce the fat in your favorite recipes and add more fresh herbs and spices for flavor d) Buy only foods that say "low-fat" or "fat-free" on the label e) All of the above 6) According to the USDA Food Guide Pyramid, from which food group should you eat the most servings each day? a) Grains -- bread, pasta, rice -- b) Vegetables -- c) Fruit d) Dairy -- milk, yogurt, cheese -- e) Meat, poultry, fish, beans, eggs and nuts 7) All you need to do to lose weight is to limit the fat in your diet. True -- False 8) The "sugars" category on the Nutrition Facts panel tells you how much: a) Table in the food c) Other sweeteners, like honey, have been added -- d) All of the above 9) Dairy products are the only foods that provide calcium. True -- False 10) If the label says "fat-free" it means you can eat as much as you want. True -- False NUTRITION QUIZ: ANSWERS 1) d. All three are nutritious, low-fat snacks you can munch anytime. 2) a. The percent "Daily Values" on the new food labels are based on a 2,000 calorie reference diet. You may need to make adjustments for your individual dietary needs. 3) d. All three popular ethnic cuisines offer healthful dishes, such as stir-fried vegetables, linguine in marinara sauce and rice and beans, that are rich in complex carbohydrates and fiber and low in fat. 4) d. An eating style that promotes your overall health is based on: Variety -- enjoying many different foods from all the food groups. Balance -- including enough, but not -- in use of fats, oils and added sugars 5) c. Cutting back the fat in your favorite dishes and adding more herbs and spices to fill the gap is the best way to reduce the fat in your diet. A healthful low-fat diet can include moderate amounts of margarine, butter or vegetable oils. 6) a. It is recommended that you eat six to 11 servings each day from the grain group; two to four servings from the fruit group; three to five servings from vegetables; two to three servings from meat, poultry, fish, beans, eggs and nuts; and two to three servings from the dairy group. 7) False. Although a low-fat diet is important for weight loss, calories still count. Limiting calories, as well as fat, combined with regular physical activity are the lifestyle changes that lead to maintaining a healthy weight. 8) d. The sugars category on food labels includes naturally occurring sugars as well as added sugars. Milk contains lactose sugars. You will find "sugars" listed on the Nutrition Facts label for these products. 9) False. Although milk, yogurt and cheese are the major sources of calcium in our diets, other foods, such as broccoli, and enriched breads and cereals, contribute some calcium. For those who can not tolerate dairy products, calcium-fortified fruit juices and breads are options. 10) False. Fat-free does not necessarily mean that the food is also low in calories. Sometimes in modifying foods to lower the fat, the carbohydrate content is increased. Check the Nutrition Facts panel for calories and serving size.
totalhealth science editor Parris Kidd, Ph.D. in his April 1999 article "Selenium Effective Cancer Prevention-A lowly Mineral Revolutionizes the Disease Paradigm," reported the following from a paper published in what he termed as the "notoriously conservative" Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA). IA high selenium yeast tablet at 200 micrograms per day produced a 50 percent reduction in cancer mortality. Selenium was also found to reduce the incidence of all cancers by better than one third." He went on to comment, "These results are astonishing... the potential this represents for cutting the emotional, spiritual and financial costs that cancer imposes on human society is almost beyond belief. Just shut your eyes for a moment, take a deep breath and think of all the people you have known who have suf fered and died from cancer." Parris concluded, "Even with my personal scientific philosophy of Nutrients First and my long-standing interest in selenium I am struggling to grasp the profound implications of these findings." Strong statements from one of the most conservative on target. The JAMA paper referred to was authored by Larry C. Clark, Ph.D., M.PH., internationally recognized for his research focused on the health benefits of selenium in humans, particularly in preventing cancer. It reported the results of a landmark ten-year, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving over 1300 subjects aged from 18 to 83. The proven cancer prevention benefits of 200 micrograms daily of the high selenium yeast used in Dr. Clark's studies can so substantially reduce the risk of cancer from death that Parris commented, "I can not think of any other agent or pharmaceutical that is proven to cut the deaths from cancer by half in any human population anywhere in the world." Although unblended, Dr. Clark's original Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial has been extended for three years and continues to use SelenoExceII(TM) High Selenium Yeast. Recently the N.C.I. (the National Cancer Institute) announced that it has signed a clinical trial agreement through its division of cancer prevention with Cypress Systems, Inc. to promote the use may lead to a New Drug Application (NDA) and a Biological License Application (BLA), The NDA and BLA are vehicles by which natural products like SelenoExcell are made widely available to cancer patients and to the general public as cancer prevention and control therapies. In that agreements such as these are typically researched for traditional drug companies it is a major breakthrough for a nutritional product to secure such a mainline position in clinical research. SelenoExcell has also been selected as the intervention agent in a series of cancer trials at the University of Arizona Cancer Center which were to be administered by Dr. Larry Clark who died on March 21, 2000 from complications related to prostate cancer. Unfortunately Dr. Clark's cancer was not diagnosed until it had metastasized. However, he continued his research throughout several years of battling the disease, including the last six months of his life while Larry, Louanne, his wife, and Julia, his daughter, were supported by the services of hospice care. I believe that as the as well as several major international trials which have been initiated, are concluded selenium will be placed in the same category as vitamin C, folic acid and fiber as a basic imperative to our human existence. Larry Clark's legacy will impact the world for generations to come. It is also Cypress Systems' belief that in conjunction with current research efforts to develop effective treatments and potential cures for various forms of cancer, individuals should take an active role in cancer prevention. Many existing treatments for cancer are expensive and usually have unfavorable side effects associated with them. It is Cypress' goal to assist people in increasing their knowledge about cancer prevention methods in order to make informed decisions about prevention strategies in health-related issues. To support this effort Paul Willis, president of Cypress Systems, has announced that baseball great Harmon Killebrew will join their public health education campaign to assist in efforts to build consumer awareness as to the need for an overall cancer prevention health program. "When I saw the results from Dr. Clarks him in person several times I realized this is something people should know about," Killebrew said. As a health-conscious male over 60, Killebrew can communicate the benefits of a comprehensive prostate cancer prevention program. As a sports hero and member of baseball's Hall of Fame he is in a unique position to reach thousands of men who might otherwise tune out health news. In researching this article I had the opportunity to interview Louanne Clark and was touched by her passionate expression of how important the hospice care experience was to Larry, her daughter and herself over the last year of Larry's life. Subsequently I became aware of Harmon Killebrew's involvement as a consultant with the Vista Hospice Care Foundation located in Scottsdale, Arizona. Harmon was kind enough to introduce me to Barry M. Smith, VistaCare founder and president. After our discussion I asked VistaCare to contribute an article on their services for the benefit of totalhealth readers. The article appears on the following page. Ask anyone what the word hospice means and it means care provided in the comfort of one's own home. To others it means receiving care in an inpatient unit or "hospice home." To Barry Smith, president of VistaCare, hospice is a philosophy of care designed to enhance the end of life experience and ensure that a patient's remaining days are spent in peace and comfort. Photograph Harmon Killebrew and harry C. Clark, Pe.D., M.PH., discussing selenium research in Clark's office. // Since its beginnings in 1967 the vision of hospice care has been to provide patients and their families with a positive, life-affirming experience. The hospice philosophy acknowledges that dying is part of the normal process of living but rather than focusing on the disease or its cure, hospice focuses on care. Likewise the philosophy of VistaCare, the second largest hospice provider in the United States, is to provide comprehensive care that provides for the psychosocial, emotional, spiritual and medical needs of terminally ill patients and their families. Major goals of hospice are to relieve supportive care. This vision is as much a part of Smith's personal life as it is his vocation. Driven by the less-than-peaceful events that accompanied the death of his brother, Smith has committed himself to providing patients and their families with the knowledge and support needed to prepare for and accept the loss of a loved one. "When my brother became ill, we really didn't know what to expect," he explains. "The end came relatively quickly and we weren't prepared. We didn't know how or what to tell his children and it was extremely difficult to discuss it with each other. Having seen what hospice care can do, I know it would have made things much easier for all of us and that's what I want others to experience." This is why in 1995 Smith and three registered nurses launched the first VistaCare hospice in Scottsdale, Arizona. Today VistaCare serves 14 states with 42 operating sites. As Smith notes, however, grief and death are difficult do not take advantage of hospice services until they are actively dying, "It is rare that a person enters the last phase of one's life at peace and ready for life's end," says Dr. perry Fine, the national medical director for VistaCare and a founding member of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Fine explains: "Chronic illness and advanced disease states are often accompanied by feelings of isolation and loss, as well as a fear of physical pain. Likewise family members and loved ones are seldom prepared to acknowledge, much less accept, the imminent loss of that family member. Therefore it is very unfortunate that hospice care is often only sought when there is little time left for us to make a quality contribution." If assistance is sought early, however, the hospice staff can do much to contribute to the experience. This is why Smith and the entire VistaCare staff are so committed to the idea of "open access" hospice care-a philosophy that distinguishes it from are eligible for hospice care will be admitted and cared for, regardless of their financial situation or complexity of care needs. Specifically VistaCare hospice welcomes all eligible patients with limited life expectancy; even those who are still involved with aggressive medical interventions that too commonly preclude admission to hospice, such as ventilator care or palliative chemotherapy/radiation therapy. Similarly, patients who are living alone without a caregiver will not be denied hospice care because of their social circumstances. "Naturally we encounter people at all stages of acceptance and in various stages of ongoing therapies-some beneficial and some that are useless or even harmful," says Dr. Fine. "It is our mission to determine whether these treatments match the goals of the patient and to transition them to more meaningful care methods if their needs are not being met." Ultimately patients want pain and symptom management, and they want to be assured that dying won't be inappropriately prolonged. They also want to maintain some measure of control over their care and to make sure they are have a strong preference to live out their lives in familiar surroundings rather than in a hospital setting. The objective of a hospice provider then is to provide exceptional palliative care for the patient and assure them that they will remain comfortable throughout their final journey. Hospice services can be delivered at several levels, depending upon the patients' symptoms and families' needs, including routine home care, general inpatient care, inpatient respite care and continuous care for times of crisis. Although the majority of hospice services are provided in the comfort and familiarity of the patient's own home, the occasional need for a licensed inpatient facility may arise to provide relief from acute pain or symptoms or to offer respite for family caregivers. Regardless of where care is delivered, patients and their family members are supported by a team of healthcare professionals who are available 24 hours a day to answer questions, provide medical assistance or simply offer emotional support. Composed of the patient's attending physician, the hospice physician, hospice nurses, home coordinators and volunteers, this collaborative team requires each member to be both assertive and receptive and to take a leadership role within his/her area of expertise. This requires a willingness to communicate openly with all "stakeholders," including the patient and family, and of course, the caregivers who are invested in this patient to one degree or another. "It is a privilege to care for these patients," says Smith. "They rely on us to do the right thing in helping them through one of life's most demanding transitions. And without the heart and soul of our staff, this important work could never be done. I applaud them for their abilities but most of all for their heart. Our staff is wholly dedicated to our mission of helping patients live all the days of their life in peace and comfort." * Are you Medicare Certified? This question is critical, as the Medicare hospice benefits provides for all services related to the terminal diagnosis including medical supplies and equipment, pharmaceutical * How involved can my own physician be in the decision-making process? The patient and his/her physician can and should determine the level of involvement. * Is there anything that would preclude me from being accepted as a hospice patient? Legally, if the patient is a Medicare Part A beneficiary and has an anticipated life expectancy of six months or less, then that patient is entitled to care by a Medicare certified hospice. If the patient's physician and the hospice medical director have certified that the patient has a life-limiting illness with a prognosis of six months, VistaCare will gladly care for that individual regardless of financial or social circumstances. * Do other insurance plans cover hospice? Yes. Most plans have some hospice benefit. Your hospice can help you determine your coverage. * Do I have to have a primary caregiver in order to receive hospice care in my home? No. * Are there any limitations on the medical treatments you will provide? A quality hospice program should provide or support any service or medical of life. * What services do you provide? The hospice program should provide a combination of medical, emotional, spiritual and familial support including bereavement counseling, respite care and pain management. * How do you handle emergency situations? The hospice program you select should maintain a telephone line that answers calls 24 hours a day, seven days a week. On-call staff members should also be available for medical necessities on a 24-hour basis. * What if my condition improves? Occasionally a patient will experience substantially improved health with an extended prognosis. If this happens, the hospice program should transfer care to a non-hospice care provider. Later, when patients become eligible for hospice, they can re-elect the hospice benefit. There is no penalty for getting better. * How long does it take to get someone onto hospice care? With your approval, the admission process should begin immediately If you are ready, they should arrange for a nurse to evaluate you today. * What are the different levels of hospice care nursing home. Routine home hospice care covers the services of the interdisciplinary hospice team, medications and equipment. Other categories of care are available when needed. INPATIENT CARE. Sometimes pain or symptoms can not be controlled at home and the patient is transported to a hospital or other inpatient care center. When the symptoms are under control, the patient returns home. RESPITE CARE. Many patients have their own caregivers, often family members. When caregivers need a rest from their caregiving responsibilities, patients can stay in a nursing home or hospice residential care center for up to five days. CONTINUOUS CARE. Sometimes a patient has a medical crisis that needs close medical attention. When this happens, we can arrange for inpatient care or VistaCare stafF can provide round-theclock care in the home. When the crisis is over, the patient returns to routine home care.
// Although we've made great strides in lowering the incidence of fatalities from cardiovascular disease with surgery and prompt treatment, heart disease is still the leading cause of death in men and women in the United States, according to the American Heart Association. As a member of the medical community for the past 30 years, I have seen scientists and doctors, myself included, actively seek a new preventative measure that could ultimately eliminate this deadly disease. There are many important facts and misconceptions that keep us from understanding the true complexity and scope of this disease. Cardiovascular disease is an equal opportunity killer which actually affects more women than men. This statistic is a shock to many women nationwide who believe this disease does not affect them as much as men. The opposite is true and heart disease strikes six to 10 times more women than breast cancer or lung cancer. In fact, I am starting to notice that one of the-major risk factors of heart disease-plaque build up that constricts blood vessels-is beginning during the teenage years in patients as young as 12-years-old. This population. It is crucial that we begin planting the seeds for heart disease prevention early and increase the level of awareness and education as often as possible. The prognosis of heart disease is important to recognize that early prevention practices are not only necessary but incredibly helpful to overall health in general. While maintaining a healthy heart is the obvious goal-diet, weight control and exercise are the major factors in achieving that goal. However, we are learning that a healthy heart is more complex than we knew, involving the health of the whole circulatory system and other factors such as a recent study on the effect of inflammation and effect of free radicals. To prevent this deadly disease, lifestyle changes are often necessary, regardless of what age you are. I recommend the following health conscious regimen to many of my patients. * Nutrition: Optimize nutritional choices including incorporating a balance of fruits, vegetables, fiber, dairy and protein into your daily diet. Learn portion control and be conscious of your food choices. Antioxidants C, are a good addition to a heart healthy diet. * Weight control and exercise: Maintaining a healthy body weight is another absolutely critical path we need to focus on. Exercise is an important activity to incorporate into your daily routine and avoiding risk factors such as smoking and engaging in a healthy lifestyle and learning how to manage anger and stress is important. These aggressive lifestyle changes can start working immediately as preventative care to counteract the risk factors of heart disease. The more effective you are in reducing these risk factors, the healthier you will be. Additionally, I believe we need to go one step beyond the aforementioned lifestyle changes and enrich our diets with antioxidant supplements which may be crucial to our overall health. For instance Pycnogenol(R) (pic-noj-en-all) an antioxidant ingredient which has been scientifically proven to increase the effect of vitamin antioxidants in the body. Armed with this information and rising concerns focused on heart heath, educated consumers are taking control of their health care and treatment options by turning to products they work in the body to combat risk factors of heart disease. Pycnogenol is the brand name of a natural plant extract originating from the bark of the Maritime pine that grows along the coast of southwest France. Horphag Research, the company that produces the extract has invested millions of dollars in research over the last 30 years, resulting in 90 published studies and peer reviewed articles which support and ensure the safety and efficacy of it as a dietary supplement. The majority of the research conducted involves the cardiovascular system, providing solid evidence that this antioxidant, is powerful in reducing inflammation in the body, strengthening the vascular system, lowering high blood pressure and cholesterol and fighting the effects of smoking, stress and other environmental risk factors on the heart. My experience with Pycnogenol has been based on much of the research using it as a blood vessel protector, enhancing the health of the whole circulatory system, and the results have been exceptional. Following research reports published last year in the Journal of the American Medical suspecting that inflammation can damage the walls of heart arteries, making them prone to fat buildups that can lead to heart attacks. Inflammation in the body is triggered either by an infection or a health condition, ranging from arthritis, asthma, stress or even minor sinus or wound infections, and is much more serious than we anticipated. Even a small amount of inflammation left for a long period of time can have serious consequences and possibly lead to heart disease. In addition to the serious effects of inflammation, the constriction of blood vessels has the consequence of a higher blood pressure, another risk factor of heart disease. Various factors cause blood vessels to constrict, such as stress, advanced age and cigarette smoking. A study at the University of South Florida, Tampa, has discovered that Pycnogenol naturally counteracts the action of stress hormones on arteries. While stress hormones like adrenaline let arteries constrict, Pycnogenol dose-dependently relaxed these blood vessels. Pycnogenol increases the diameter of blood vessels, supporting an improved blood flow. history of heart insufficiency showed increased blood vessel diameter and improved microcirculation in response to supplementation with the extract. Hypertension is just one of the major risk factors which can be managed by taking it. The most recent correlation between Pycnogenol and heart health was a clinical study published in Lipids by Dr. Kenny Jialal at the University of Texas, Dallas. After three and six weeks of daily dosages of 150 mg supplementation, Dr. Jialal found that Pycnogenol significantly reduced the LDL-cholesterol levels (often referred to as "bad" cholesterol) in the blood, while the HDL. -cholesterol (the "good" cholesterol) was elevated in the participants of this study. The third risk factor of cardiovascular disease is increased "stickiness" of blood platelets, which increases the likelihood that they will form a blood clot. There are several reasons for platelets to get more "sticky" including stress, diabetes, smoking and advanced age in general. The event of blood clotting in a vessel (thrombosis) can cut-off tissue from oxygen incident that causes a rapid and measurable increased aggregation of blood platelets ("stickiness") is smoking. Dr. Ronald Watson of the University of Arizona showed in his studies that taking Pycnogenol prevented the increase of "stickiness" of blood platelets. This effect has awarded Pycnogenol U.S. patent (# 5,720,956). Decades of scientific research has established the therapeutic benefits of Pycnogenol it is also recognized as a staple in personal daily vitamin programs. It is included in hundreds of dietary supplements, multi-vitamins and health products worldwide. Sidebar Diet, weight control and exercise are the major factors in achieving the goal of a healthy heart. Author Affiliation by Steven Lamm, M.D. Author Affiliation Steven Lamm, M.D., nationally known health expert, is a widely respected medical practitioner and professor of medicine. Currently, Dr. Lamm serves as clinical assistant professor of Medicine, NYU-Bellevue, is a best-selling author and has conducted several clinical trials. He has over 200 network appearances discussing health issues. //
Introducing a Golden Age of Nutrition // The omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA are the BIG news in nutritional medicine today. And for the best reasons. First, they directly save lives by protecting against heart attack, including the lethal arrhythmias. They're safe to take long-term, they're affordable, and their anti-inflammatory properties ensure protection for all our organs. The scientific evidence is now incontrovertible (read awesome) that DHA/EPA are essential for good health and long life. DHA and EPA are such awesome nutrients that agencies and institutions historically hostile to nutrition have gone on record to support their use. The American Medical Association, the American Heart Association, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), even the good ol' Food and Drug Administration (FDA), are all praising DHA and EPA. And the way the research is goinBon't be surprised when the cancer establishment and the weight loss folks also sign on. Cell Membrane Nutrients-Essential to Life Itself DHA and EpA are fatty acids-long, stretched out molecules with their carbon atoms linked all in oxygens. Both these molecules have unsaturated, carbon-carbon double bonds (DHA has 6, EPA has 5). They are present in all our cells, where they help build the dynwlic membrane systems that do just about everything important for life. The cell is the basic unit of life. Within all cells, the majority of life processes occur in or upon the membranes, DHA and EPA are part and parcel of larger phospholipid molecules that are the structural and functional building blocks for all cell membranes. This makes them crucial to the survival, growth, renewal and assorted life functions of our cells, and by extension to our tissues and organa and our body as a whole. The DHA and EPA content of our cell membranes responds to our dietary intake so that we have power over the omega-3 content of all our cell membranes. From the huge amount of research conducted over the past three decades, here's some of what DHA and EPA do for our health: * Support brain development and maintenance and protect the heart muscle, coronary circulation, and all blood vessels against atherosclerosis, and contribute to blood pressure maintenance; * Support healthy anti-inflammatory balance in the brain, intestines, joints, all other organs; * Help maintain positive mood, including lifting depression and calming manic activity; * Help keep children calm while optimizing their cognitive performance; * Very likely contribute to cancer prevention (more studies needed); * Probably assist with weight maintenance (more studies needed); * Improve skin quality through enhanced blood flow and other means; * Overall, increase quality of life and extend disease-free lifespan. Lifesaving Benefits for the Heart and Circulation With heart and blood vessel diseases still the number 1 cause of death, and coronary heart disease killing half a million people annually in the United States alone, DHA/EPA'S proven cardiovascular benefits make them a salvation for public health. In late 2004, the United States FDA approved one of their famously grudging qualified health claims: "Supportive but not conclusive research shows that the risk of coronary heart disease." The evidence supports the following cardiovascular benefits for DHA/EPA: * Prevention of first or second heart attack, including sudden cardiac death; * Protection against cardiac arrhythmia, improvement of heart rate variability; * Prevention of coronary artery re-blockage (from atherosclerosis reoccurrence); * Reduction of clotting risk from inappropriate platelet behavior; * Slowing of atherosclerosis by improving the vessel lining (endothelium); * Improvement of insulin sensitivity, and lowering of circulating triglyceride levels; * Reduction of triglyceride surge after a meal (linked to heart attack risk). Essential to Brain Development, Cognition and Mood The human brain doesn't work to its full potential without omega-3s. The dynamic properties they give to cell membranes are especially necessary for our nerve cells, which are the largest and busiest cells in the body. DHA/EPA give a fluidity to cell membranes that allows for efficient conduction of the electrical stimuli and for overall high efficiency within the brain. High brain demand for DHA/EPA begins in utero, Demand rises as the brain grows exponentially in the third trimester, and it continues after birth as the baby's circuitry becomes consolidated through environmental experience. After years of scandalous neglect, omega-3s are finally in infant formulas, though breast is still best and the mother should generously endow her milk with DHA/EPA. As the child grows and matures, the high demand continues, since DHA/EPA are necessary for learning, memory and other cognitive functions, and mood and appropriate self-control. The brain's demand for DHA/EPA continues throughout life. Population (epidemiologic) surveys and other clinical studies indicate that adults in middle age or older who have more DHA/ EPA in their cell membranes have a lower risk not just for heart attack or stroke, but for suffering accelerated brain decline and progression to dementia. DHA/EPA are very effective in managing mood disorders: clinical depression, manic depression (bipolar disorder), and, to a lesser extent, schizophrenia. They're also good for developmental disorders such as AD(H)D and dyslexias, and have for these disorders are on the order of grams per day, amounts that can only be fully obtained by taking concentrated supplements. Cell Membrane Nutrients-Allied with Phospholipids and Antioxidants The phospholipids that are the major cell membrane building blocks, especially PS (phosphatidylserine) and GPC (glycerophosphocholine) both have stellar records as dietary supplements for memory, learning, mood, and stress relief. Both these nutrients have a biochemical synergy with DHA, whereby they move these molecules into the nerve cell membrane and hold them in position to enhance membrane fluidity and related membrane dynamics. PS-DHA (from combining PS+DHA) and PC-DHA (from GPC+DHA) are key molecular components of the brain's billions of circuits. Phospholipids also hold EPA in place for it to be a precursor to messenger substances ("eicosanoids"). Healthy cells have a complement of antioxidants that sit in their membranes to protect them against spontaneous disintegration. The membrane antioxidants work in natural synergy with the omega-3s in the membrane. Being especially endowed with unsaturated bonds these fatty") destruction without the antioxidants close by to protect them. Within the active membrane milieu, DHA and EPA are in natural synergy with the membrane's antioxidants as well as its phospholipids. The most important membrane antioxidants are vitamin E, coenzyme QIO, and the various carotenoids. Membrane antioxidants also regulate the production of messenger substances from ERA in the membrane. These eicosanoids (prostaglandins, thromboxanes, leukotrienes) are formed by controlled oxidation of EPA, a fragile process kept in favorable balance by having adequate antioxidants in the membrane. Just as in the membrane, DHA/EPA supplement products also need membrane antioxidants close by. They're safe to store and consume as dietary supplements only when they're well protected against spontaneous oxidation. Good omega-3 supplements have generous amounts of antioxidants added in, and they are certified free of pollutants by independent lab analysis. Incidentally, the shorter chain alpha linolenic acid can not adequately substitute for DHA/EPA. DHA/EPA Omega-3s Have Something for Everyone Just as every thinking family has a bottle of vitamin supplement. The pregnant mother needs generous intakes to nurture her fetus, throughout pregnancy postpartum depression has in fact, been linked to omega-3 deficiency. The newborn needs it to build and mature all the organs. Older kids need the omega-3s to help them function in school and avoid behavioral problems. But their parents need them also, maybe more so. All adults should betaking DHA/EPA, not justto protect them against heart attack or stroke but to help them stay energetic, positive and balanced as they deal with the stresses ofwork and family. Women with menstrual or menopausal problems and men with fertility problems also stand to benefit. The grandparents need it for their arthritis, their intestinal problems, to help prevent osteoporosis, to feel good, period. There's also fast-accumulating evidence that DHA/EPA supplements help fend off memory loss. They may help for weight control, and likely lower the risk of some cancers. DHA/EPA have something important to offer everyone. While the omega-3 DHA/EPA are undoubtedly "good fats," the are often called "bad fats." This is a fundamental misunderstanding, because they also are essential for healthy cell function. The real "bad fats" come from a diet that is very high in saturated fats and cholesterol, or especially from the hydrogenated ("trans") fats that come from processed foods. The former can make our cell membranes too rigid; the latter pollute our cell membranes. Both threaten the membranes' omega-6 to omega-3 balance, which is the key functional measure. It's not the quantity of fats that we consume, but their quality that brings problems. For optimal health, our cell membranes must have both omega-6s and omega-3s. To get your membrane Omega-3 Index, check out http: //reglab.saintlukes-org (St. Lukes Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri) orwww.gsdl.com (Great Smokies Diagnostic Laboratory, Asheville, North Carolina). How Much Should We Take? DHA/EPA are practically vitamins, since we have to obtain virtually all our needed supply from our diet. They seem to The shorter-chain alpha-linolenic acid is not a useful additive, since it is not efficiently converted to EPA and then DHA. Our diet has been losing these since the early 1900s, when industrialized food processing came into vogue. Certain spreads and otherfoods enriched in omega-3s are now available, but caution is required to ensure that their other ingredients are helpful. For example, one heavily promoted spread carries trans fats that are liable to defeat its stated purpose. Currently, the typical Western diet provides 100 mg EPA+DHA per day or less. The most reliable minimum intake figure for protection of the heart and circulation is 850 mg per day of DHA+EPA. This is likely the lowest daily intake necessary for adults to maintain their health. To get this amount from the diet alone would require eating one large serving of salmon every day. The USDA's and others' recommendations that Americans consume two meals per week of oily fish-salmon, trout, or herring-would still fall short of 850 mg per day. From the clinical-scientific knowledge base day is still at the low end of intakes needed for full benefit. Also, most salmon available in the stores is contaminated with mercury or other toxic heavy metals, or with petrochemical pollutants. Wild salmon is better, but is very hard to find and is expensive. The unavoidable alternative is to take dietary supplements rich in DHA/EPA. Will the Codex-WTO Conspiracy Take Away Omega-3s? Codex Alimentarius is the body of government representatives and nongovernmental organizations charged by the United Nations' World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization to establish international guidelines on food law. Unfortunately, the committee handling dietary supplements has not been operating openly and through consensus. If this committee's biased recommendations are accepted by the Codex Commission, and the U.S. government accepts Codex Alimentarius, it could impose restrictive standards on the types and potencies of dietary supplements available to the American public. Causing further concern is that the Codex Commission signed agreements with the World Trade Organization (WTO) that give WTO the right to use any Codex document as the proposed restrictive guidelines, the U.S. or another country could get dragged into court for violating GATT or NAFTA Free Trade policies. Pharmaceutical interests are highly influential in the Codex process, and the omega-3s are so good they could threaten the statins as well as aspirin and other anti-inflammatories. So let's keep a wary eye on this CodexWTO unholy alliance. DHA and EPA-Pioneering a Golden Age for Nutrition The Codex conspiracy may have something to do with the dietary supplement paradigm-a safe and affordable means for people to become healthy-overtaking the toxic pharmaceutical paradigm. The Old Order is scared by the writing on the wall: Anything Drugs Can Do, Nutrients Can Do Better. DHA/EPA are leading the charge-no pharmaceutical does as much as they do. But they are just one example of the versatility of nutrients for human health. Society needs the freedom to consume nutrients over a wide range of dosages. Typically there's a great range of difference between intake of a nutrient to prevent deficiency symptoms, and taking higher amounts to build optimal (CoQ), and folic acid (folate) remain safe and are increasingly effective as their intakes are increased. Take vitamin C, for example. Vitamin c's safe and effective intakes range from less than 100 mg to more than 100,000 mg, at which level it's a lifesaving antiviral. CoQ at 400 mg may well protect against cancer, in addition to helping the circulation, brain and other organs. With folate, the higher our intakes the lower our risks for various cancers Similar to these nutrients, DHA/EPA have a broad intake range: a few hundred milligrams a day for most kids, less than 1 gram for healthy people, more than 1 gram for heart attack survivors, and up to 10 grams for mood disorders. Society needs to have access to these and all the other nutrients in their safe dosage forms and potencies. DHA/EPA are opening the door to a Golden Age for nutrition. Let's protect them, so that we and our children's children can benefit from them. Author Affiliation by Parris M. Kidd, Ph.D. //
Mom, makeup artist, Hollywood wife and Stila Cosmetics creator Jeanine Lobell shares her laid-back approach to looks. By Emily Dougherty Photograph // Jeanine Lobell's first makeup phase was an experiment in bad taste. "It all started with teal mascara and blue eyeliner. I piled it on when I was a teen," admits the founder of Stila Cosmetics. "Next came my mod-punk phase, with red lipstick and a severe bob, followed by my funky -- hippie phase, with heavy kohl liner." Now, Lobell, a 30-something pixie with huge brown eyes, wears practically no makeup, even while being photographed for Bazaar or attending the Emmys with her Mr. Hollywood husband, Anthony Edwards (that nice Dr. Green from ER). "Just a bit too much makeup can make me look harsh," says Lobell, who does her own makeup for all public appearances. "It's not me, and I want my outside to match my inside." If you can't find the perfect shade of lipstick, follow Lobell's lead of Stila cosmetics are products that I personally craved," she says. Funny and fun, smart and pretty: The same adjectives that describe Stila makeup can be used to sum up its creator. You won't catch Lobell at a photo shoot without: -Peter Thomas Roth Daily Defense Moisture Cream: "The best sunscreen-it doesn't leave skin greasy, white or streaky." -Sample packs of Remede Rinseable Cold Cream and Sweep facial exfoliant (right). "I get them from the Bliss Out catalog." -Shu Uemura eyelash curler -Evian Le Brumisateur mist -Elizabeth Arden Eight Hour Cream -Kiehl's Ultra Facial Moisturizer CHEAP SHOT Lobell buys cute head scarfs, her current trademark, at Urban Outfitters. ("You can pretend you're Ivana Trump and buy up the place. Then when they ring it up, it's less than a hundred bucks!") When she can't keep her hair under wraps, she shapes it up with Bumble and Bumble Grooming Cream. Photograph //
BAZAAR PROFILE Headnote To mark the arrival of a new biography of Pelly Guyyenheim, we asked Karole P. B. Vail to tell the story of her grandmother, the legendary, idiosyncratic art collector. // It was not until I was in my early 30s that I truly began to understand my paternal grandmother, Peggy Guggenheim. I first met her when I was a little girl in Venice, Italy, where she lived. I would go there with my sister and parents; and Peggy would sometimes visit us in Paris, where I grew up. However, I did not ever see much of my grandmother, as there was a love-hate relationship between her and my father, Sindbad. He was her first child from her marriage to Lawrence Vail in 1922. (She went on to have a daughter as well, my aunt, Pegeen.) My father resented the fact that Peggy had always focused on herself and her art collection rather than on her own family. It was clear that she did not want to leave the collection to her family, better mother and grandmother. In fact, she bequeathed it to the Guggenheim Foundation, along with her home on the Grand Canal. Now I think it would have been a terrible pity to divide her unique collection among so many grandchildren and, in effect, ruin her life's work and only honest commitment. Peggy's own childhood had not been easy. Her mother paid her little attention, and her father, Benjamin Guggenheim, was a notorious philanderer until he died on the Titanic in 1912. Though Peggy inherited some money, she was never endlessly wealthy like Doris Duke or Barbara Hutton, as has often been erroneously believed; she always minded her purse. Peggy had lived in Paris with Vail, an American writer and artist who introduced her to modern literature and art, but it was not until 1938, after they had divorced, that her own venture into art began, with the opening of her Guggenheim Jeune gallery in London. Here she showed works by Cocteau, Kandinsky, Tanguy, dedicated her time to purchasing art in London and Paris. In 1941, she left Europe with surrealist artist Max Ernst, to whom she was briefly married. In October 1942, Peggy opened a gallery named Art of This Century that became the most exciting venue in New York for contemporary art. She organized many solo exhibitions for emerging American artists and gave Jackson Pollock his first four solo exhibitions. In 1948, she showed her collection at the Biennale in Venice, where she settled until the end of her life in 1979. She had already assembled her legendary collection and acquired little thereafter. Photograph The art collector at Palazzo Venier dei Leoni, her home on the Grand Canal in Venice, Italy, in 1950. Photograph At home in Venice in the '60s. Portrait of Peggy Guggenheim, 1926, by Alfred Courmes. // My sister and I used to call her Grandma-the-Dogs, because she had many Lhasa apso terriers, which we loved, and in order to differentiate her from our maternal grandmother had the full run of the house. Everyone else called her Peggy, including the other grandchildren. I think she quite liked to be called Grandma, especially in her old age, maybe because it made her feel part of the family. Grandma-the-Dogs seemed more personable, though she maintained a certain distance from children, as if they bored her, which they probably did. When I was 13 or 14 years old, an awkward age by any standard, I felt the most terrible anxiety about spending the Easter vacation in Venice. My sister and I shared a bedroom that was painted a bright emerald green. We slept in a four-poster bed, and there was a beautiful, but slightly gloomy, black marble bathroom for our exclusive use. These rooms are where many of the paintings by Pollock hang today. Then, in the bedroom, there was a painting that I found spooky: Paul Delvaux's The Break of Day, representing naked tree ladies, who peered down at us with their large Ernst's Attirement of the Bride, which we found terrifying, even repellent! Instead I responded to Pollock and tried my luck at splashing paint onto paper. When my grandmother's collection was exhibited at the Orangerie in Paris in 1974, I remember that she stayed with us at our home. My father would delight in antagonizing visiting journalists with the "small Pollocks" that hung on our walls at home. They were, in fact, painted by me. We were not allowed to go too close to her paintings in Venice, but we could "play" with the sculptures in the overgrown garden. We used to ride on them, especially Jean Arp's wonderfully organic Amphora fruit bronze, which just begged to be mounted. But what we loved most were the stone sea horses on the canal terrace that transported us across the lagoon in our wildest fantasies. Playing in the Venetian garden was always a welcome respite from the house and from the tension between my parents and my grandmother. Photograph // Whenever we actually traveled on water, it was either in her beautiful gondola adorned with lions-the symbol of Venice-or her sleek Riva motorboat. The gondola was always the object of photographers trying to get a snapshot of "the last dogaressa" (or doge's wife), as Peggy was known in Venice. The gondola was used to cruise from church to church, where I was ordered to go and look at the paintings and frescoes and then report back on what I had seen. Peggy cut an imposing figure in her extravagant outfits: Indian caftans, sandals of her own design inspired by a Carpaccio figure, large rings, and her eccentric, surreal sunglasses. Unfortunately, I never saw her wear her gold lame Fortuny dress, which must have been quite beautiful. Though not classically attractive, Peggy was striking in her own way and did not succumb to fashion dictates. Her style was her own, and always idiosyncratic, which I found embarrassing as a teenager but certainly admire today. Peggy where magnificent Cubist paintings by Georges Braque, Juan Gris, Fernand Leger, and Pablo Picasso adorned the walls along with an exquisite Robert Delaunay Windows painting. The room was furnished with Renaissance chests and chairs, which perfectly counterbalanced the modern paintings. There were times, often in the summer, when we would eat on a large glass table in the hallway, surrounded by more Picassos, a large mobile by Calder, and a Giacometti plaster cast. Gazing at the paintings was the wise thing to do, as the food was not of the highest quality, and neither was the wine. If a friend invited us we would go out for lunch at Harry's Bar, which Peggy loved but found very expensive. She usually demanded a discount, even if she was not paying, and it was always graciously given by Mr. Cipriani. At night, Peggy and I would eat, often alone, in the library, meals of tomatoes, sardines, and stale breadsticks, as the servants had already that the servants ate better and drank better wine, and I was not wrong. I think that Peggy probably never forgot that she had had to tighten her belt when her father died, and when she seriously began to collect. So she could be quite mean, but at other times she was quite magnanimous in her giving. Though she was not one to send out birthday cards, she would usually give my parents a handsome amount of cash to buy us fancy clothes or anything else that pleased us. I wish I had asked her more questions about her life in Paris during World War II and in New York City, as well as about the personalities who visited her in Venice. But my interests were more literary at the time, and I devoured Samuel Beckett's plays. It is thanks to Peggy-who had had a brief affair with the playwright after her marriage to Vailthat I had dinner one evening with him, together with my parents. Beckett, if anything, was even more overpowering tonguetied all evening, much to my outrage thereafter! My recollections of Peggy are very mixed-ambivalent, angry, sympathetic-and quite ironic in light of my life today. It is only recently that I have recognized the legacy that Peggy has left me, something I could never have anticipated when I was a surly adolescent girl. I often wonder why she did not give each of her grandchildren any of her paintings and sculptures, instead of donating all of them to museums and institutions around the world. Maybe she wanted to educate and help museums, or maybe she felt that everyone, independently of family ties, should do their own thing, regardless of what has come before. The irony is that I now have become a keeper of sorts for her. I have organized several exhibitions about her in the past few years, and I am striving to keep a photographic archive. I want to keep her flame alive, because the collection she created is truly her lasting legacy-one that she wanted to give to everyone: A Biography of Peggy Guggenheim, by Anton Gill, is published this month by HarperCollins. //
The only recipe this celebrated hostess insists she'll never change is her well-calibrated mix of comfort food, lively guests and casual dining rules. Grab a tray and serve yourself // Photographed by Jessica Craig-Martin No tie required. No attitude allowed. Simple rules, but ones that have served Nan Kempner-and her scores of invitees-for the 46 years she has been purveying Sunday dinner parties at her Park Avenue duplex. Plenty of wine and Kempner's signature pasta carbonara are what fuel the monthly event, which is surprisingly low-key considering the international fashion-icon stature its hostess warrants. (Kempner's first couture purchase was made at the age of 19.) "I love my Sunday spaghettis!" she says with characteristic cheerfulness. "I give my friends good wine, good food and good company, and it's up to them to have a great time." Forget the black-tie affairs, sixcourse meals cooked by the latest four-star chef or a controlling hostess who deliberately steers the dinner conversation, then shoos her guests out the door at 10 o'clock sharp. "Nan is" There's a real informality about her dinners that makes them cozy and comfortable. At her home, you know it won't be a stiff, formal evening. "Uncanny for a woman widely heralded as a grande dame, with her seemingly unrivaled wardrobe, reed-thin frame, throaty laugh and inimitable style. The only problem is that the label grande dame just doesn't sit well with Kempner. She loathes pretension but does admit to adoring a good entrance. She recently attended the American Ballet Theatre (ABT) Spring Gala in- "yes, yes, the dress Nicole Kidman wore to the Oscars," she admits with a shrug, referring to the red incarnation of the now-famous Jean Paul Gaultier couture gown the Academy Award-winning star wore to this year's ceremony. Kempner isn't laid-back, per se; she's more like a well-dressed tornado of energy and enthusiasm. Her closet may be daunting, but her idea of entertaining is gloriously relaxed. Carolina Herrera, a Sunday spaghetti regular for "!" enjoys going to Kempner's because "everything at her house is perfect: She puts everyone at ease, looks effortless, the food is the best and the mix of people is great!" WHAT TO WEAR Break out the five-inch stilettos for this type of party, because you won't be required to actually walk in them. Casual dinner seating on low sofas offers good opportunities for showcasing glamorous shoes. Most of the women on this night wore pants, pairing them with blazers, sweaters and fanciful wrap tops. * 1an wore Loulou de la Falaise and a necklace of semiprecious stones from Tony Duquette. * 1arolina Herrera donned a jacket and trousers from her own collection. * 1erena Boardman sported a TSE cashmere turtleneck and jeans. * 1lair McClure Husain slipped on a vintage silver brocade dress. * 1rina Dvorovenko wore a dress by Vivienne Westwood. * 1athy Horyn was turned out in Narciso Rodriguez. * 1laine Trump wore a Michael Kors suit. Case in point: At a recent Sunday dinner to many years), attendees included longtime friends Kenneth Jay Lane, Blaine Trump, Reinaldo and Carolina Herrera, Paul Wilmot and Countess Sheila de Rochambeau. There were also members of Manhattan's younger social set, such as Serena Boardman, Blair McClure Husain and Prince Dimitri of Yugoslavia, as well as ABT principal dancers Julie Kent and Irina Dvorovenko. In Kempner's silk-paneled dining room are two round tables set up to accommodate 24 people; the rest get to "tray it" in the living room. The hostess herself prefers the unstructured dining option, but before she carries her rattan tray into the living room, she surveys the tables. She believes in open seating but insists on one thing: "Boy, girl, boy, girl" ordering is a must. "Hah! Look at that... boy, boy, boy," she murmers. "Oh, well, tant pis!" she says, throwing her hands up in mild desperation. "Tant pis!" repeats Prince on the smoked-salmon galette she contributed to the evening, with the help of chef Bernardo Barrasso. He is stepping in for his wife, Sylvina, who's been Kempner's chef for 40 years but is currently on vacation. "I love to eat!" enthuses Kempner. "But I like simple food. I like to know what I'm eating." "Nan's parties are so great, because she has the best time at them," says jewelry designer Kenneth Jay Lane, a frequent visitor. "It's easy," responds Kempner. "I've been doing this for so many years, I should be good at it by now!" Her home, which was decorated 46 years ago by the late interior designer Michael Taylor, is conducive to entertaining. With a heyday in the '60s and '70s, Taylor was responsible for decorating the San Francisco home of Kempner's mother. Nan's living room, with its tonal shades of beige, sofas, is chic and intimate-perhaps too much so for her mother's taste. When the room was first completed, she declared, "It looks like a bordello!" Nonetheless, says Kempner, "Decorators have come from all over the world to look at it," adding that not much has changed except for the stenciled walls in the library, a room highlighted by two Magritte paintings and a Picasso. Asked if she follows any preparty rituals, Kempner just laughs. "I take a bath and get dressed. I change clothes for dinner every night, even when it's just my husband, Tom, and me," she admits. "For dinner parties, I wear at-homey clothes-anything from jeans to a negligee. I also have what my mother would call a lot of" hostess "dresses." Tonight's look consists of flowing lilac silk jacquard pants and a chartreuse silk jacquard top by designer and Yves Saint Laurent muse Loulou de la Falaise. "I think Loulou is room, Dvorovenko is offering diet tips to Husain; Boardman is telling Trump about Marjorie Gubelmann Raein's Palm Beach wedding, which she just left hours earlier, disembarking from a plane just in time for dinner. But the main topic of conversation is what everyone will wear the following night to the ABT gala. These days, designers are scrambling to dress prima ballerinas as if they were red-carpet icons. Dvorovenko has pieces from Valentino and Roberta Cavalli for the next evening, and she feels pressure, knowing that someone will be disappointed. (She chooses the Cavalli but vows to wear Valentino to the next big ABT gala, at City Center on October 22.) Meanwhile, Kempner is laughing about the difficulty she had maneuvering into her Gaultier couture at the fitting." Thank God, Sheila de Rochambeau is going to be here tomorrow night; otherwise, I might have to go naked! "She also makes light of what others would consider an earth-shattering crisis: The week before, at the Costume, someone stepped on the hem of her Valentino gown, causing the buttons at the back to come undone and exposing a bare bottom. Kempner only sees the humorous side to the whole incident, which is part of what makes her a supreme hostess. "Nan has a wicked sense of humor," says Trump. "With her, you never know what she's going to say, so you just have to hold on to your seat! She's not afraid to let it rip." Sounds like the recipe for a perfect night. Jennifer Alfano Sidebar "Nan has a wicked sense of humor," says Blaine Trump, midconversation with Serena Boardman. "With her, you never know what she's going to say so you just have to hold on to your seat! "Sidebar THE MENU * 1acon-wrapped breadsticks for hors d'oeuvres. * 1asta carbonara. * 1moked-salmon galette. * 1eef bourguignonne. * 1nsalata caprese (tomato, basil and mozzarella salad). * 1rosciutto di Parma-and-avocado salad. * 1ruit is like a general," says Kempner, quoting the Roman poet Horace. "Calamities often reveal his genius." Hers is captured R.S.V.P. a book on entertaining. //
She's the mistress of bling at Dior Fine Jewelry, and her lofty apartment-hidden away in the center of Paris-is just as unconventionally chic // Even at 9 A.M., Victoire de Castellane is full of surprises. "Living here is like being in the 1950s, and I love that," says the playful Dior Fine Jewelry artistic director about her apartment in Paris' 16th Arrondissement, where she moved three years ago. "It seems so far from the world." It's unexpected because, though she lives in serenity, de Castellane is better known for her whimsical ways. She's dressed, as usual, in a bosom-spilling frock (today it's a'' 50s-style printed Prada number), shod in voluptuously high Louis Vuitton heels and sporting chunky cocktail rings in an array of berry shades; she also has a beaded Hello Kitty bag close by. "Countless contrasts amuse me," she explains of her style and the home she shares with Thomas Lenthal, creative director of Numro magazine, just three floors down from style icon Lee Boniface and Jules-from her former marriage, as well as Zo, her one-year-old daughter with Lenthal, de Castellane considers leading a quiet life paramount. The bedroom is her favorite room in her home "because that's where our bed and television are!" she giggles. But there's more to this nostalgic retreat than meets the eye: If the tiny, quirky rubber figurines of Japanese anime superheroes beside an ample minimalist cream sofa merely suggest fairy-tale-like proportions, then de Castellane's vast closet, arranged in a rainbow of colors, is her playground. "I have to be able to see everything," she explains. "I loathe a closet stuffed to the brim. Clothes are fun, but they should not invade your personality." Since launching Dior's fine-jewelry line in 1999, she has certainly brought back the "big personality" ring, just as she jazzed up the costume jewelry at Chanel from 1984 to 1997. Women on the street-as long as they are wearing jewels-inspire her, and'll never forget being in a department store, trying on some very girly diamante hair clips, and there was this 70-year-old woman trying them on, too, with every intention of buying them. I love that. "Here, more of her favorite things. IN HER CLOSET Spring must-haves: A Louis Vuitton cherry-print handbag and Dior heels. Closet staples: Dresses from French designer Fifi Chachnil and Les Folies d'Elodie, Dior cardigans and Fogal tights. Trademark accessories: Huge rings, Marc Jacobs shoes with flowers or bows and custom-made Olympia Le Tan bags. Worn to shreds:" A Christian Dior dress with jacket that belonged to my maternal grandmother. When I was little, I used to pull it out of her cupboard and dress up in it. Now that I'm older, I go out in it. "Best fashion investment:" Australian opal earrings from the 60s. They're wildly outdated, and I love them for that." Cheap fashion thrill: "My collection market in Hong Kong." Most treasured piece of jewelry: "My aquamarine ring from the Incroyable collection. It reminds me of the sea." Best luggage: "30s Goyard suitcases. Evening accessories:" Petrol-blue tights and mules. I adore the "click-click" sound the mules make when I wear them. "IN HER HOME Furniture: A mix of streamlined pieces by Jean-Michel Frank and Emilio Terry; grand 18th-century antiques. Art on her walls: Photographs by Thomas Ruff and Irving Penn. Favorite room scent: Vapeur- or Santal Rouge-scented candles by lunx. Signature stationery: Smythson blue cards with her name in dark blue. Books on her nightstand: "I love biographies. I'm reading one about the writer Romain Gary, who was Jean Seberg's second husband." Sheets on her bed: From Nol on Place d'lena in Paris. China in her cabinet: Raynaud or Thomas De Lussac during the day, Minton for tea and Herend at night. Silverware on her table. Favorite floral arrangement: "Real flowers die too quickly. I like flowers only on jewels or dresses." Next purchase for her apartment: "A portrait of myself by Pierre et Gilles." Natasha Fraser-Cavassoni Style secrets Signature look: "Wearing lingerie slips like dresses, with a small cardigan. Because I have a very hourglass figure, I'll wear brightly colored tights to make myself look less vampy." Style icons: "Shirley MacLaine I in lrmala Douce, Helena Rubinstein and Barbara Mutton wearing their jewels." Current fashion obsession: "Pairing very bright colors like tangerine and turquoise." Fashion tips: "Buy something new and immediately give something old away." If you buy a trendy piece, "put it away for a few seasons and wear it when the trend is over." Finishing touches Beauty essentials: "Kneipp bath oil, Dior mascara, powder and blush by Bourjois. I don't wear perfume." Favorite shop: "The department store Le Hosting a night at home Glassware: Antique Lalique. Music on her stereo: The Best of John Barry. Be sure to: "Throw parties at the end of the week, and serve market-fresh food prepared by someone else." Preparty prep: "Put on another coat of mascara." Sidebar A "one in, one out" rule for new purhases keeps the designer's vast closet in order. On de Castellane: Her own Dior by John Galliano cardigan, Fifi Chachnil dress and Dior Fine Jewelry rings. Sittings editor: Natasha Fraser-Cavassoni //
It becomes part of the ritual of every well - baby visit: the baby is weighed and measured and the numbers are carefully recorded on a growth chart. Recording the baby's growth is important because a drastic variation from normal, or a sudden change in the baby's previous pattern, can be a signal of some significant medical problems. But parents -- especially breastfeeding mothers -- sometimes become unnecessarily anxious about weight gains that seem unusually fast or slow, even when the baby is otherwise healthy. On average, a baby will double her birth weight at about five months and triple it at one year. (The average is roughly seven pounds at birth, 14 pounds at five months, and 21 pounds at one year. To convert from pounds to kilograms: 1 lb. = 0.45 kg.) The normal range of weight gain is between four and eight ounces per week for the first six months, slowing to between three and five ounces per week for the rest of the first year. Lactation consultant Deanna Rattmann emphasizes that these figures are averages either side of the average. "Your baby's pattern of growth may not fit the charts (for example, some babies gain weight more evenly throughout the entire year), but it may be exactly right for him. Rattmann points out that the growth charts used by most physicians were developed using primarily formula - fed babies (they are distributed free to the doctors by the formula manufacturers)." We know that breastfed babies have a different pattern of growth, and they may not conform to the charts because of that. We really need to have some charts specifically for breastfed infants. "Even if those charts were developed, individual babies would show deviations from the norm. Rattmann encourages parents to consider other signs of growth and development, rather than focusing entirely on where the baby fits on a particular chart. They should also consider how the baby's body length is growing, how his head circumference is growing, whether his skin and general appearance is good, whether he is generally happy bowel movements and wet diapers," she says. "If the baby is doing well in all these areas, the low weight gain is probably not significant." Rattmann also points out the importance of considering the baby's genetic background. She remembers one case she was asked to assist with, where a breastfed baby girl weighed only 13 pounds at one year of age. Rattmann first spoke to the mother over the phone, and learned that the baby's health seemed otherwise good. When she finally met the little girl and her parents, though, it was all she could do not to laugh. The mother was about 4' 10", fine - boned, and very slender; the father was about 5' 1" and just as slight in build. Their daughter, although definitely smaller than average, fit perfectly into that family. These genetic differences are also important when considering babies from various ethnic, racial and even regional groups. Because the charts currently in use with a population of primarily European heritage, babies of (for example) Japanese or Korean heritage often seem to be comparatively slow - gaining. Parents of babies whose weights go off the top of the chart can also become concerned. Deanna Rattmann's son Peter was born weighing nine lbs., 13 oz. and weighed over 19 lbs. at age two months. He was totally breastfed, and continued to gain weight at this rate until after he was six months old (Rattmann remembers her friends calling him "The Little Buddha.") Their family physician expressed concern that Peter might have a metabolic disorder that was causing this rapid weight gain, and had a paediatrician examine him. Peter, however, was quite healthy, and has grown into a child who is tall and husky -- just like his parents. Rattmann explains that the fast - gaining breastfed baby is rarely a concern. "We know that the fat of breastfed babies is different from that of babies fed formula. Babies who are be obese as adults, even if they gain weight very quickly in their first year." When breastfed babies are gaining too slowly, the tendency is to blame the problem on breastfeeding, and quickly switch to formula - feeding. Rattmann suggests that other steps can be taken to improve the situation. If medical problems have been ruled out, the mother should pay close attention to how the baby is nursing. Is the baby well latched on to the breast, with the nipple well back in his mouth? Is he dropping his jaw well down as he sucks, with only short pauses, and can you hear swallowing? Is he nursing long enough at the first breast to get the fat - rich hindmilk? (Rattmann recommends letting the baby come off the breast on his own rather than timed feedings.) Has the mother been delaying feedings by using a pacifier, or offering water (which has no calories)? If these problems can be solved, often the weight gain will improve. with formula (using a cup or lactation aid) rather than weaning altogether. Just as adults come in all shapes and sizes, so do babies. Remember that growth charts are about averages," Rattmann says. "There have to be some babies who are at the top or bottom of the charts, or who gain at a different rate. Fitting into the chart isn't important -- having a healthy baby who shows steady gains in all areas of growth and development is."
For my son Jeremy, age ten, the fad right now is Pogs. Any time we go shopping, I know I'm going to be prodded to buy more of these... ("I really need a Thumper, Mom!"). When he was ten, my other son, Danny, insisted that most of his clothes have Blue Jays logos or designs on them. Now he's "too old" for that, and he wants more sophisticated clothing (Home Improvement T-shirts are popular). He's traded in the comfortable sweatpants he once wore on every occasion for loose-fitting blue jeans. Both of them are solidly committed to the Baseball Cap as a fashion statement. Each night when they go to bed, the Cap of the Day is carefully hung over the bedpost, topping a stack of baseball caps. In the morning, a new cap will be just as carefully selected. They are worn indoors, outdoors, to school -- although a few teachers require their removal in the classroom -- and, of course, at fad and keeping up with the newest fashion suddenly becomes incredibly important. It can be a shock when the child who cheerfully wore hand-me-downs or whatever you picked up at the store abruptly refuses to wear anything that isn't approved by her peers. Parents are often worried about the cost of the current fashions (the most popular item is almost invariably the most expensive) and that their children are too caught up in being "one of the crowd." Other parents find watching their children begin to make independent choices about what to wear very stressful -- they may feel as though they are losing control. If this sounds familiar, try not to take your child's choice of clothing or activity as a personal rejection -- don't forget that your preteen needs to feel that she can be her own person. As Oakville, Ontario parent educator Dianne Banks says: "Parents should remember that fitting in with their friends is very important to children of this age. Even if you don't find the clothes friends are wearing similar styles having the right clothes can mean a lot." Of course, it isn't always possible to buy your child the "in" thing. "If it's something your child really wants, but it's beyond your budget, let him know that you would really like to be able to get it but can't afford to. Perhaps you can work out a way for the child to earn the money, or perhaps it could be a special birthday gift." Often, having a few of the "right" clothes will be more important than having many changes of clothing. Dan, for example, has decided he'd rather have a couple of pairs of jeans (which he washes frequently) than a half-dozen pairs of sweatpants that would cost the same amount of money. (See how responsible a preteen can be when he needs to be!) While a preoccupation with fads, fashions and fitting in is a normal stage, some parents worry because Mary, age ten, differs from many of her friends in that she seems completely unconcerned with clothes and fashion: "Mary plays hockey and soccer and loves sports. I guess she is more worried about whether her clothes are comfortable than about how they look on her," say Stuart. "When I threw her old running shoes away, she actually fished them out of the garbage because she said they were more comfortable than the new ones." Banks assures parents in Susan Stuart's situation that their kids are doing fine. "It's OK to support a child who wants to fit in by wearing the clothes that are in style, but we also need to let our children know that it's OK to be different." And, of course, Mary's interests may change as she gets older. In a couple of years, she could feel the way 11-year-old Kiera Beitel does: "My mom says," Why do you have to have this shirt? What's don't have the right clothes and stuff, other kids make fun of you. If I wore the clothes my mom likes, I wouldn't even be able to go to school. It would be too embarrassing. "Your first few experiences with your kid's quest for the "right" stuff are not likely to be your last -- in fact, with the teen years looming, this may be just the beginning. But if you start to feel exasperated, try to remember how you felt about having certain clothes or games when you wanted to fit in with your peers. Then you may realize just how crucial a Pog can be.
Karen Fourcaudot knew her nine-year-old son, Garrett, was addicted to electronic games when he played so long that he developed blisters on his hand. But even then, he didn't stop. "He just moved his hand so that the joystick didn't actually rub on the blisters, and kept on playing." When preteens spend hours looking at the screen, chances are they're not word-processing or mastering spreadsheets. For children this age -- and let's face it, many of them are boys -- one of the main attractions is games, whether they're played on the family computer or using a video game set linked to the TV. What is it about these games that completely mesmerizes kids? Greg Fouts, a child psychologist and professor at the University of Calgary who studies the effects of media on child development, says simply, "Kids like to play them because they're fun. They provide an intellectual challenge -- it's exciting to figure out the strategy and solve the problems presented to them, and very satisfying when they beat particular because they involve role-playing and fantasy, Fouts says. "Children this age project themselves right into the game." At the same time, it is psychologically safe." The child knows he's just playing against a machine, so if he loses, it doesn't hurt his self-esteem. He's not going to be ridiculed or embarrassed by the computer, as he might be if he were competing with a real person and losing." After interviewing lots of kids, Fouts has discovered another, not-so stellar attraction. "Many children say they are bored otherwise; they say they don't have much to do besides these games. Others say they have nobody to play with and that they like the games because they can play them alone." Clearly there are some gaps in these children's lives, says Fouts. "It may be that kids who are not socially skilled gravitate to these games, because it's easier to play them than to improve their ability to make and do need to learn to develop friendships, play with others, negotiate, get along, share and all those other skills. They won't learn those things playing electronic games." Another concern for Fouts is the content of the games." The basic theme is usually "Might makes right." The more people or aliens or monsters you destroy, the more likely you are to win. "The emphasis on power, competition and destruction is very unbalanced, he adds. And while kids do need to develop strategies to win the games, the strategies tend to be very linear, Fouts says. "Creative or divergent approaches aren't part of these games. "Fouts" biggest worry is the amount of time that computer or video games can take away from other activities. "A child who is playing games four hours a day is not reading, doing homework or spending time with friends during those hours. He's not playing in the park or getting any exercise. The games's life out of balance." To check your own child's balance, Fouts suggests asking yourself the following questions: - Are electronic games taking time away from other activities, such as sports? - Is your child's desire to play interfering with family activities or outings? - Is it interfering with the amount of time he plays with other children? - Are you using these games as a babysitter? A "yes" to any of these questions might indicate that parents need to put some restrictions on game playing, and add other activities to the mix. "Parents should also talk to their children about what they are playing," Fouts adds. "The games can be very sexist, for example. Ask your children what would happen in real life if people did the things they do on screen. Ask about other options you could try in real life that don't work on the computer because of the limitations of the games." Is there a bright side to all this games increase hand-eye coordination, and this skill improves the longer children play. Computer games also build children's comfort with technology -- which is essential for our kids' generation. And according to Karen Johnston, mother of three diehard players, video games can be conducive to socializing. "We have three controllers, so the boys often play together, and if their friends come over, they bring another controller so everyone can play. Having the games is part of the social thing -- they all want it, desire it and if they don't have the games their friends have, they feel left out." Kids often spend time on the phone discussing strategies or "cheats," as well as other aspects of the game. Finally, it's worth investigating the more wholesome end of the spectrum. Try steering your child toward the sports games that simulate football, snowboarding or hockey, or titles such as SimCity or Tetris, which involve more strategy and less violence. Or you can do a vacation, Garrett insisted that his favourite games go along as well. Fourcaudot simply said that wasn't possible, and Garrett "threw a tantrum." But it didn't last long. "He came back downstairs and said he guessed he could get along without them for a week and apologized for getting upset," Fourcaudot says. His mom knew that was a good sign, an acknowledgement that, yes, you can have fun without a joystick in your hand. Resources Afraid of the Bath Penelope Leach's Your Baby &; Child from Birth to Age Five (Knopf, revised 1997) includes sections on fears at various ages.
Your body works hard in the weeks after the birth. Here's what happening: // During pregnancy, women usually look forward to the day when their bodies will be "back to normal." But if you expect this to happen right after the birth, you'll be in for a shock. Your body has a lot of work to do in the postpartum weeks: recovering from the hard work of labour, healing any tears or bruised tissue and getting milk production underway. It will take time for your body to return to its non-pregnant state. Your uterus, stretched to many times its original size, must contract over the next few weeks until it's nearly as small as before your first pregnancy. It is important that it contract efficiently right after the birth, to prevent excess blood loss. Breastfeeding will help this process; you may also recieve an injection to help your uterus contract. The uterus sheds its lining as it contracts, so you will have bleeding from the vagina, much like a menstrual period. This will gradually to six weeks after the baby's birth. When you breastfeed your baby, her suckling will stimulate your uterus to contract. This may be uncomfortable for a few days and may cause a gush of blood from your vagina, but it helps to reduce the total amount of blood loss and returns your uterus to its non-pregnant size. Urinating for the first time after delivery can be challenging - it's as though your body has forgotten how! Once you get the plumbing working again, you may discover that urine stings the sensitive perineal tissues surrounding the vagina. Using a squirt bottle to pour warm water over your perineum as you urinate will make it more comfortable and help to keep any tears clean. You may also worry about the first bowel movement, especially if there are stitches. Plenty of fruits, vegetables and water will help keep your stools soft, so you don't have to strain. You may have had a tear or an episiotomy during the delivery of your baby. Even if you tender. An ice pack, made from a plastic sandwich bag filled with crushed ice or frozen peas, will reduce the swelling and discomfort. Whether or not you plan to breastfeed your new baby, your breasts will produce milk. In the first few days, the milk is called colostrum and is a creamy yellow colour. There won't seem to be much of it - but it is just what your newborn needs. After about the third day, your breasts will become fuller and may be quite tender as the "mature" milk comes in. Frequent nursing will help keep engorgement to a minimum. If you do become engorged (your breasts will be hot, hard and uncomfortable), ice packs wrapped in a towel may reduce the swelling. About 15 minutes before the next feeding, switch to warm wet washcloths or run a gentle shower spray over your breasts, and then express a small amount of milk. If you are wearing a bra, make sure it is large enough and worn inside your bra between feedings and changed when they wilt have also been shown to help ease engorgement. And take heart - the engorgement should pass in a day or two. Breastfeeding mothers may find that their breasts leak between feedings, or leak on one side while the baby nurses on the other. This does settle down eventually. In the meantime, cotton nursing pads inside your bra will absorb the milk - but be sure to change them frequently. Some women develop stress incontinence after birth. This means that when they sneeze, cough or laugh hard, a small amount of urine is released. The muscles can be strengthened again with Kegel exercises: Tighten the muscles that control the urine flow (practise on the toilet if you're not sure which muscles to contract) frequently through the day. You may also find the appearance of your abdomen discouraging. Those abdominal muscles have been stretched to their limits, and they won't "snap back" overnight. Nor, for that matter, and don't stress your body with drastic diets. You need good food to stay healthy. Some experts suggest that you should consider your pregnancy to be 12 months long instead of nine. The "fourth trimester" (as the early postpartum months are sometimes called) is a time to recover physically, establish breastfeeding and adjust to life with a new baby. Try not to worry yet about how your body looks. Eating well, getting as much rest as possible and gradually returning to light exercise will help you make the transition from expectant mother to busy parent. Sidebar Caesarean Recovery Sidebar You didn't just have a baby - you had major abdominal surgery as well! Sidebar Your hospital stay will be longer than that of a mother who gave birth vaginally, and you may need extra pain-relieving medication while you recover. Mothers are encouraged to be up and walking as soon as possible after surgery - but you also need extra rest. You will need help with the housework once you return home. the incision will burst open every time you laugh or cough. It won't, but you'll probably feel more comfortable if you use a pillow or rolled-up towel to support the incision. Sidebar Finding a comfortable breastfeeding position can also be a challenge. Many Caesarean mothers prefer lying on one side (perhaps with a pillow against the abdomen) to nurse; others use the football hold, which keeps the baby's body alongside the mother's rather than resting on the incision. The nurses at the hospital can help you try out these positions. While your recovery may take a little longer, be reassured that with rest and good nutrition, your body will soon heal. //
A Q &; A on talking to kids about death // CHILDREN ARE PRONE TO THE MOST creative interpretations of death - some poignant, others just a bit startling. When one little girl heard her sister had become an angel, she asked her mother if she'd seen her grow wings and fly away. A three-year-old boy, after staring at his grandmother's open casket, abruptly turned and asked the crowd of mourners, "Who shot Grandma?" Children want and need to know about death, yet we are often reluctant - even squeamish - when talking about it. Perhaps we want to protect our children from the harsh truth. In a sense, we may be protecting ourselves too, as children can seem quite tactless in their quest for understanding. It's certainly unsettling when your five-year-old daughter asks what Uncle John looks like now - a year after he's been dead and buried. Experts agree, however, that we're not doing our children any favours by shielding them from death and dying. "We live in a world where opportunity to talk about a dying or dead person," says Sue Bourque, a parent educator in Victoria. Yet, she points out, we have no qualms about exposing our children to TV programs and videos in which a character dies. For many children, their first exposure to death happens in an F-rated flick. "It's almost as though the video has become the teacher. It's incredibly unhealthy." At the same time, we don't want to induce nightmares or intensify their trauma. We want to teach our children about death in a healthy, developmentally appropriate way. Here are a few questions that might be on your mind - and some expert help in providing the answers: My son is five, and I'm not sure he really understands what death is. How can I explain it? Children younger than six, says Bourque, "live in a magical world, so death isn't permanent for them." Because they interpret things so literally, they need to stop living: A dead person's heart doesn't beat, she doesn't breathe, she can't hear, she can't feel pain. Without an explanation like this, a child may come up with his own fantasies about death, and sometimes imagined truths are more frightening or disturbing than reality. It is important for parents to open up the discussion, explore what their children think about dying and loss, and correct any misinformation they have. "With all children, you want to be clear, simple and concrete in giving them information about death and loss," says Pauline Johnson, acting bereavement coordinator at Victoria Hospice in BC. She emphasizes that children at different ages require different degrees of discussion. "It's very important to meet the child at their level of understanding." Not only should a parent take age into consideration, but also children's individual temperaments. A resilient 10-year-old may be able to handle an explanation of suicide; the same information can be shocking to her own death, and she worries about her dad and me dying. How can I help her deal with her fears? Make it clear that, for most people, death isn't going to happen until they reach old age. Tell your children what you personally do to keep healthy and safe, such as eating well and wearing a seat belt. "Parents need to reassure children that it is rare for people to die young, and that they are healthy and expected to live long lives," says Arlette Lefebvre, a child psychiatrist at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children. Agnes Struik agrees, cautioning parents to avoid promising children that they will always be around. "But be clear with them that most children have both their parents for a long time. An accident is an unusual thing. "Struik, a children's consultant for Bereaved Families of Ontario, says that when young children display these fears," usually they are suffering from some sort of separation anxiety. "Lots will help ease their distress. Even older children may worry about being suddenly orphaned - but don't be too flattered." Often this is less about concern for you than about "How will I survive?" says Johnson. Tell children that even though it's unlikely you'll die when they're young, you have made plans for their care in the event that anything should happen. Let them know that Uncle Dan and Aunt Cheryl have agreed to look after them. And if you haven't yet come up with a strategy?" Parents might take this as a good opportunity to make those plans. "What if I get upset while talking about a loved one's death? We're all human, and there are moments when it's just overwhelming," says Johnson. If a parent truly feels she can't handle talking about the death at a particular moment, she can ask for help from a relative, close friend or even a teacher who may be equipped to be unsettling and even frightening for a child to see a parent in emotional disarray, Johnson says, "it's important for kids to know what was going on for you, to see you recover from those feelings and talk about what you do to feel better." Children take their cues from adults, so when they see parents recover from grief, "it helps them to know that they can learn those skills as well." Sometimes parents mourning a spouse will spell themselves off by sending their children to a close relative for a few days. But Struik warns that young children may find this discomforting. "Sometimes children feel as though they've lost both parents. "I'm trying to be open and honest, but is there anything I shouldn't say? We really encourage people not to use euphemisms," says Johnson. "They often lead to misunderstanding for children." A case in point is the little girl who imagined her sister as an angel with wings. Telling have a specific meaning for her. Perhaps he remembers when Grandma went to Florida - and came back. Don't say the loved one has passed away or is gone. And never tell a child that death is like going to sleep. "It may scare young kids from going to sleep," says Lefebvre. Lefebvre adds: "Children's questions need to be answered as honestly as possible, in age-appropriate words. But parents need to use their judgment also. For instance, a young child may not benefit from knowing all the gory details of a car accident or suicide." By age nine or 10, children sometimes do persist in asking for those gory details. In her private psychotherapy practice, Struik will ask them, "Can you tell me what it is you want to know, what it is that worries you?" She explains: "There's usually something else underneath that." Perhaps the child needs to know that his parent didn't suffer. If that's like "They died very quickly," and "It didn't hurt for long." "If there was a lot of pain, keep the explanation simple and emphasize that" Daddy doesn't hurt anymore. "What should I tell my child about an afterlife if I don't believe in one?" Parents should always be honest about their own beliefs, but emphasize tolerance for beliefs other than their own," says Lefebvre. However, although it's important to be truthful, you may wish to wait on pushing your own ideas until you've heard from the child. Let him share his own thoughts with you and be open. Usually, says Struik, as a child goes through his own developmental stages, he'll come to his own conclusions." It doesn't help a child to suddenly say, "No, that's not what happens." To take that away would be really painful for them. "My mother is dying. Is there any way before it happens? A lot of children are referred to Lefebvre to help them prepare for the death of a parent." I start by explaining the disease or condition that doctors are trying to help mom or dad with, then introduce the notion that sometimes doctors run out of medicines or operations to help people with this disease, and finally, the fact that the parent may not be around much longer. "Generally, these conversations take place over weeks or months. Bourque recently helped her own neice and nephew through the loss of a 12-year-old relative, who died of leukemia." The children around her knew she was dying. They could see the tears. "Bourque explained to them that this was an illness not many children get, and that although treatments are available, unfortunately they weren't working for Elizabeth." They needed to hear that honesty. They needed to be in the loop. "Let your child know that the doctors have been doing everything they can do, as understand that the loved one is not choosing to die. Help them find ways to offer comfort -like bringing a favourite stuffed toy, a note or flowers to the hospital. Teaching opportunities can crop up years before a loved one dies. Parents can find lots of examples of the life cycle in nature, as leaves fall and flowers fade. A lifeless bug discovered in the backyard might be a starting point for discussion. After my husband died, my son would be crying one minute, and then tearing off to play the next. Is this a normal way for a child to express grief? "Children go through a play-grief-play cycle," says Struik. "They are very good at knowing how much they can take. When they've had too much, they're out the door - but then they come back again." "Children grieve in all kinds of ways," agrees Lefebvre. They may become outspoken and angry, acting out physical behaviours, or they may become withdrawn, no matter what the child's age, or new anxieties may develop - such as fear of the dark. Young children will often become clingy and tearful. Basically, says Johnson, parents can expect "any behaviour that departs from normal." Parents can help by updating other adults in the child's life, such as teachers. Let them know that the child may be more sensitive or may have trouble concentrating, and ask them to speak with you if this happens. Young children may need extra hugs and snuggles. For older children, Johnson recommends a "side-by-side activity" to provide a safe setting that encourages discussion. "Less verbal children may not sit and talk face to face about their feelings, but if you go kick a ball around or drive in the car, that's when they begin to talk." Should kids go to the funeral? Unless a child is adamantly opposed to it, he should be involved in this ritual. Explain the funeral in advance so there might be tears, and remind him that's OK. If he wishes, allow him to take on a role - a preteen can help seat people, while an eight-year-old can contribute an anecdote to be read with the eulogy. Just remember that a child has a short attention span and can get easily overwhelmed. Arrange for someone to step in if needed. Let your child know that Aunt Karen will be there to take her out for a walk when she's ready. "Sometimes having a school friend at the funeral will be comforting to the child," Johnson suggests. Should children view an open casket? And what do I say about cremation? Although many children are comfortable viewing an open casket, others have nightmares about it. Struik has known several children to crawl right inside the casket with the deceased person. Others will clearly say, "I don't want to look." Give the child a choice, explaining what she might expect to see - the eyes will different - and take her lead. If a body is cremated, let the child know this doesn't hurt. Explain that it was what Uncle Jeff wanted, and that his ashes will be sprinkled in a place that was special to him. Keep it factual. "Children don't think it's so weird," says Struik. "Kids are capable of working through the notion of dying and grief in healthy ways," says Bourque, "as long as there's an adult around to give them support and the agespecific knowledge that they need." It's true, when we make an effort to push aside our own anxieties, we are rewarded with the wonderful openness of children. FOR MORE INFORMATION The Compassionate Friends of Canada offers grief education and support to families who have experienced the death of a child. 1-866-823-0141 or tcfcanada.net Rainbows establishes self-help groups for children, youth and adults grieving a loss. 1-877-403-2733 or raihbows.ca Bereaved Families of Ontario has chapters throughout the province. 1-800-236-6364 or How to decide when your kids need a change // THE BELY-MACPHERSON FAMILY HAD A GOOD NANNY - some would even say a great one. Sonia took the kids to the park, arranged playdates, organized crafts and, excepting the very occasional fast-food lunch, championed children's nutrition. And because Sonia was shared with another family, costs were manageable. It was a perfect child care scenario - well, almost perfect. After a year in the nanny-share, Nathalie Bely started to notice that her eldest child, three-year-old Angus, was becoming quiet and withdrawn. "He was bored," she says. "The nanny had her hands full with my daughter and the daughter of the other family, who were both almost two, and Angus's interests just couldn't be addressed. She was doing everything she could, but the nanny just couldn't meet the needs of both the toddlers and the preschooler." So Bely decided the time had come to move on, and enrolled her kids in a half-day preschool program near their home. Switching from parents, a prospect so dire it ranks right up there with changing jobs or even moving houses. For most families, though, a time comes when they have to leave a comfy-cozy care situation - whether it's because of mom's new job, a seven-year-old's evolving social life or a tween's burgeoning need for autonomy. On average, Canadian kids will experience two or three different child care situations before they leave elementary school, says Cheryl DeGras, co-president of the Ontario Coalition for Better Child Care. "Most parents cobble together a patchwork of services to meet their changing needs," she says. "For the most part it's not possible right now to find everything you need for all ages all under one roof." (That may be changing, however; see "One-Stop Shopping," p. 90.) Just to be clear, we're not talking about quality issues here. If you have concerns that your child's caregivers aren't up to the job, you when your child is in a program that you love or with the world's most wonderful caregiver, there can come a time when the fit no longer works. How do you know when? Learning to read the signs can help you make the right call. "I'd rather play outside." When Nathalie Bely saw her overburdened care provider so busy pushing two toddlers in the baby swings that she was unable to encourage Bely's three-year-old gymnast on the monkey bars, she knew it was time for a change. In any care arrangement, children need to be challenged, both physically and cognitively, says Laurie McNelles, director of the Mothercraft Institute for Early Development in Toronto. "Children learn best when there are some things they can do independently, some with prompting and some not at all. You really want to see that range - whether in a licensed facility or Grandma's house." But adequately addressing a wide range of needs is beyond the physical scope of even the best grandmas space limitations. That's because, says DeGras, "most programs don't have the money or infrastructure necessary to be all things to all ages. What you end up seeing are scattered facilities that seem to specialize in the age group that is predominant." That specialization can become a straitjacket as children grow - as Ruth Hatch realized when the home care she used simply got too small for her two-year-old's burgeoning need for physical play and socialization. "We loved our home daycare for a long time," says the Hamilton mom. "But by the time Thomas turned two, it became apparent that there just weren't enough kids his age to keep him stimulated, and not enough room in the house for really active play." Finding care that caters to a child's evolving interests becomes more challenging as children enter the school years - when developmental preferences and talents really start to emerge. "Piquing a child's interest is essential," says McNelles. "We're not just grows and personality emerges, we want to see individual preferences nurtured and for them to be happy too." Keeping her two children happy was a big reason Cynthia Cormier decided to make a change in care when the family moved back to their Toronto neighbourhood after a year away. Russell, then eight, and Colette, six, had liked their school's after-care program when they were younger. But their mom felt they were ready for a little more flexibility; it would also help them settle back in and reconnect with friends. So she hired a sitter to pick up the kids from school and supervise them till she arrived home at suppertime. Three years later, Russell and Colette still love the arrangement, which means they can choose whether to play outside, have friends over, get a jump on homework, go visiting or spend some time on the computer. Bonus: The sitter often cooks dinner for the family. "But, Mom, I'm too old for daycare." As "started when her son was only 10." I don't want to hang out with a bunch of babies. I want to play with my friends. "The Saskatoon mom's eldest son, Luke, craved independence, but she felt he was too young to be on his own for the two hours between school and 5:30, when she arrived home from work. What McNelles recommends for this age group is a gradual weaning from care - a step-by-step approach that reassures nervous parents as it satisfies kids hungry for independence." Perhaps you first allow them to go to soccer practice on their own before heading over to their daycare; then you can graduate to home alone - keeping in mind you have to make sure all the appropriate securities are in place." It's a compromise that worked for Pennock and her son. At age 11, instead of going straight to his school's daycare in the morning, Luke and his younger brother went to their neighbours' across the street. children to school. After school they went to their grandparents '. By 12, Luke had his own key and his parents trusted him to make his way home on his own. "I was lucky because my job was close to home and I was able to get there by 5:30. That meant he was alone for just over an hour," Pennock says. "We discussed ahead of time what he could do in that hour and I checked in by phone frequently - that was the compromise we could both live with." "It's going to cost how much?" When Laura Haggart factored the cost of her second child, Kate, into the daycare equation, quitting her job to be a full-time mom was the most viable financial option. "My eldest, Callum, had just loved his home care provider, and we would have been happy to put Kate into the program if the money had made sense. It didn't," says the Toronto mom. one parent deciding to stay home after the birth of a second child," says DeGras. "The math just makes more sense that way." In fact, says DeGras, "In my 20 years in the child care and early learning business, I can tell you that what motivates most parents to move on is money. They decide they can no longer afford to commit to their current child care arrangement." That financial pinch may be a product of creeping costs. Since 2000, child care subsidies have been cut in most provinces. According to the anti-child-poverty organization Campaign 2000, modest-income families allocate over one-quarter of their annual earnings to child care. But sometimes that still isn't enough - especially as a family grows. For Haggart and many others, the best decision is to move on. "What about my needs?" When Mary Connelly* moved from downtown Vancouver to a small community in the BC Interior, she was delighted to find a fabulous daycare with space for her then-two-year-old easily. All was well, with one major exception - the daycare was on the other side of town, requiring Connelly and her husband to make a time-consuming drive each day. "We have a huge value around walking as much as possible and spending as much time together as a family as possible," says Mary. "The location of this facility not only made it impossible to walk, it also ate up so much family time. We had to drop my daughter at school in one end of town and then drive to the opposite end to deliver my son. Or we would divide and conquer with one parent going in one direction and the other going in the other." In any family, the needs of the child are important, but the needs of the family, including the parents, matter too. "Finding work-life balance is a difficult, but necessary, parental burden," says DeGras. "So if a facility right across the street makes life more balanced,, finding a program close to home bought valuable family time and saved her the struggle of a commute - well worth a move. Sidebar Transition Tips You've decided it's time to change daycare arrangements. Now what? First, says Laurie McNelles, director of the Mothercraft Institute for Early Development, realize that the transition will likely be harder on you than your kids. Children are far more adaptable than we give them credit for, she says. Besides, "change is a good opportunity to teach a child that she is capable of new situations and challenges and that she can handle stress." These steps can ease the change for everyone: PREPARE KIDS. "Visit the new facility ahead of time, make practice runs, even ease children in with half-days," says McNelles. USE POSITIVE LANGUAGE. "Won't this be exciting?" is far more encouraging than "Now, don't be afraid. "HOLD A CELEBRATION." Rituals are a helpful way to mark an school or program - and to make the child feel special," McNelles says. INVOLVE OTHERS. Create a network of support and encouragement by asking family and friends to call or query your child about his "wonderful new daycare." ESTABLISH HAPPY CLOSURE. You might want to create a goodbye note to leave behind for care providers and special friends. Involve your child in this process so he sees finality in a positive light. One-Stop Shopping: The Future of Daycare? Bye-bye minivan mom. The stereotype of the harried mother who lives in her car, racing from daycare to school to soccer, may see its demise - if advocates of "integrated" child care have anything to say about it. Advocates like Kerry McCuaig, communications director for Toronto First Duty, a project that delivers "early learning and care" for children from infancy to age 10 under one roof. The project, she says, was prompted by the realization that most kids are being bounced around from one care facility to. "Housing a wide range of services - from infant care to after-care in one building - offers consistency for kids and convenience for parents." "Integrated" child care is a hot topic worldwide. In Australia, the ruling Labour Party is aiming to overhaul the current child care system in favour of" one-stop shops, "while the Scottish National Party is lobbying for the development of integrated centres in schools. That's because finding both funds and housing has been a big stumbling block in integrated care. While schools are the ideal location - they are large enough to retrofit diaper-change tables while also allowing an eight-year-old access to a gym and a 10-year-old access to soccer practice - less than half of all child care programs are located in schools. In Canada, the First Duty Project currently operates integrated care at five Toronto sites, and McCuaig is hopeful that the program will unfold in other major cities soon. Visit toronto.ca/firstduty for more info. Today's Parentcom Read up on the pros and cons of as a Parent section and clicking Child Care, or swap experiences with other parents at Todaysparent.com/forums. Footnote * Name changed by request. //
Nine months of pregnancy can give you not only a bouncing baby, but a bulging belly as well. Even if your weight is back to normal, stretched and weakened abdominal muscles can leave you with a paunch. What's more, for most women the stretching is accompanied by diastasis recti, a painless separation of the central abdominal muscle (which runs vertically from rib cage to pubic bone) that occurs as the belly expands during pregnancy, says Raul Artal, M.D., chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at the St. Louis University School of Medicine. In most cases, the gap will close up within a few months of delivery, but without exercise ab muscles will remain weak, which can lead to lower back pain. But if you start doing regular situps, you could actually slow the healing process, says Catherine Cram, an exercise physiologist specializing in post -- partum fitness in Middleton, WI. Also, standard situps don't target the lower abs, which is where most of the stretching and weakening occurs during pregnancy. To these lower-ab exercises, designed by Shirley Sahrmann, Ph.D., a physical therapist at the Washington University School of Medicine. Because you progress through the moves as you feel ready, these exercises are ideal for postpartum ab work. And they're so effective you may want to make them a permanent part of your fitness routine. "When these exercises are done properly, abdominal strength and tone may return in postpartum women in four to eight weeks," says Cram. "And they help get rid of the "pooch" below your belly button without putting stress on your lower back." Begin doing these moves as soon after giving birth as you're physically able. If you had a C-section or pregnancy complications, or have a wide diastasis (see "Measuring the Great Divide," page 62), check with your doctor before working out. // MEASURING THE GREAT DIVIDE // STEP-BY-STEP AB TONERS //
What fascinates your baby, and why Photograph // THREE-MONTH-OLD JACOB Azriel can't get enough of the ceiling fan. "He'll fling his head back when I'm holding him so that he can look up and watch it go around and around," says his mom, Patricia, of Albany, New York. For 4-month -- old Conor Muerle of San Francisco, his own reflection is a constant source of amusement, according to his mother, Georgia. "He smiles so broadly at himself whenever we hold him in front of a mirror." From birth, babies crave sensory experiences, whether they involve touching, tasting, or hearing music. Stimulating the senses sets the stage for learning and physical, emotional, and social development, so it's vital that parents satisfy that need. The best way to do this: Take your cues from your baby, say experts. Because infants have very individual sensory thresholds, what's captivating to one child-a particular kind of mobile, for example-might be scary to another. And more often than not something as simple as water being poured from a cup. "Babies notice the little details that adults screen out," says Amanda Woodward, Ph.D., associate professor of psychology at the University of Chicago, who has a curious 4-month-old of her own. "They don't have any expectations about how things should be, so everything they encounter is new and interesting to them." The amount and type of stimulation your little one enjoys also depends on his individual neurological system, as well as on other factors, such as whether he's tired or hungry or what kind of mood he's in that day. You need to become the authority on what pleases your own baby, and then find ways to provide enough stimulation without overwhelming him. But you must look sharp, because a signal that your child has had enough may be as subtle as his turning his face away. In baby language, that's like saying "I'm outta here," says Linda Rubinowitz, Ph.D., a in Evanston, Illinois. The things that most fascinate babies usually fall into one of these categories: motion If it moves, you can bet your infant's eyes will be drawn to it, especially if it also happens to make a noise (think jangling keys, a chatty sibling, or a musical spinning top). Experts say that this attraction is "hardwired": It's how a baby is biologically designed to react. A preference for moving objects may also have to do with the way an infant's brain develops as she grows. "Observing how things move eventually helps us identify them and understand what they're for," says Arlene WalkerAndrews, Ph.D., professor of psychology at Rutgers -University. This affinity for motion is one of the reasons that people, animals, and mobiles all tend to be particular favorites with babies. novelty Studies have shown that infants 4 months or older will look longer and more intently at objects that are new to them rather than at things that are a stranger-especially if this person also has a beard, eyeglasses, or other features that are different from what he's used to. It's also why a favorite toy will lose its appeal after a while and why a person he doesn't see every day, such as a delivery person or an aunt, will often get him very excited. contrast Photograph If it moves, you can bet your infant's eyes will be drawn to it, especially if it also happens to make a noise. // We've all heard about how infants like to look at things that are black and white, but their preference for strong contrast goes beyond that. Babies will often stare right at your hairline or into your eyes, drawn to the darkness of the irises against the white background. They may peer happily at a pattern of leaf shadows moving on a wall (it's got both contrast and motion) or gaze with rapt attention at dark beams against a white ceiling or a blue-and-white striped couch. aspects of their surroundings babies seemed to enjoy looking at, found that they'd stare at the outlines of things, such as the edge of a table or where the wall meets the ceiling-anyplace where light and dark come together. No one knows exactly why infants love contrast so much, but there are several possible explanations. One is that there are more neurons being fired inside a baby's brain when she's looking at things that are distinct from each other, which indicates increased stimulation, says David Moore, Ph.D., associate professor of psychology at Pitzer College in Claremont, California. Also, since babies aren't able to focus clearly on things that are beyond about 12 inches in the early months, when they're looking in the distance, their eyes will gravitate toward objects that they can see better, such as those that have dramatic contrast. response Infants love feedback. Whether it's a rattle that jingles when they shake it or a voice that coos back at them when they gurgle, world around them. Since they're constantly trying to figure out how things work, anything that reacts to them will hold their attention. In fact, babies are so sensitive to cause and effect that even infants as young as 1 month will take note-and sometimes even get upset-if something they expect to happen doesn't. In one famous experiment, researchers sat in front of babies, one on one, keeping their faces blank no matter what the infants did. When the infants tried to engage the adults who were looking at them and couldn't, they burst into tears, usually within about 45 seconds. This need for a response is one reason a baby is naturally drawn to faces. Mom's face is one of the first things he sees when he's born; on an evolutionary level, being able to search out and focus on the most important item for survival-his mother -- certainly makes sense. Not only that, faces come with many of the characteristics that infants find so fascinating: motion. Babies especially love to look at baby faces, including their own. Looking at lots of different visages, even if they're just pictures, can keep them occupied for a good long time. rhythm and music Photograph Since babies are constantly trying to figure out how things work, anything that reacts to them will hold their attention. // Almost all babies love a good beat, whether it's a favorite lullaby, a Bach prelude, or their own hand pounding on the highchair tray. While researchers aren't sure why this response to melody and rhythm is so universal, some theorize that infants have been primed in utero to appreciate music. "The sounds they heard prenatally-their mother's heartbeat, her voice, even her blood flowing through her veins-all have a cadence that's comforting," says Moore. Babies "appreciation of music appears to be so fine-tuned that in one study, when researchers played part of a Mozart concerto with an added pause in the melodic flow, the infants seemed to, says Moore. (Babies were able to choose one version over another by sucking on a specially rigged pacifier fast or slowly; they consistently picked the music that didn't have a pause.) "As they get older," says Rubinowitz, "babies like to play with sounds. That's what all that gurgling and babbling is about. They love to hear other people sing and talk, as well as hear themselves; this communication is very exciting for them." imitation If you do something, chances are good that your little one will want to give it a try too. Daily activities, such as aiming the TV remote control and pressing its buttons, spooning food from your plate to your mouth, and putting on makeup, are fascinating for babies, who want-and need-to learn to do everything you do. While even a newborn will imitate your facial expressions, it isn't until 4 to 6 months that infants are able to really mimic the things they see. Babies', garage-door openers, and eyeglasses are favorite toys. We certainly seem to have a fun time "playing" with them, so it makes sense that they'd want to take a turn too. Taking some of the mystery out of the things that your baby loves most can help you understand how her mind is developing, help keep her happily occupied-and give you a whole new perspective on the world around you. "The things that fascinate my daughter amaze me," says Marla Renfro of Bellevue, Nebraska, whose 8-month-old, Shavonne, is constantly captivated by the ordinary objects around her, such as the family cat. "She'll stop crying, stop eating, stop everything to watch, smile, and laugh at the cat," says Renfro. "For her, each day is a new chance for discovery. Through her, I've started finding the joy in small things all over again." m Sidebar objects of affection Sidebar Grandpa HANNAH OTTILIA COSSELMON, 10 MONTHS "She her arms whenever he enters the room," says her mom, Deborah, of San Francisco. Sidebar the space about an inch and a half to the right of Dad's head QUINN MATULIS, 2 WEEKS "When I see him staring, I move my head to the right so he's looking directly at me," says his dad, Scott, of Oak Park, CA. "After about two seconds, he moves his eyes so he's looking to the right of my head again." Sidebar rhythm THOMAS OSBORN WEINSTEIN, 5 MONTHS "He loves music," says his mom, Sue, of Arlington Heights, IL. "Every time he hears a melody, he always gets this really intense look on his face, like he's concentrating." Sidebar anything that's not a toy SARA PAGE, 12 MONTHS "Her eyes light up with glee whenever something she's not supposed to have is within reach," says her dad, Paul, of Washington, that is our living room and make a beeline for a mug of coffee that's been set down for a minute. "Sidebar other babies ABIGAIL HOHN, 11 MONTHS "Abbie freaks when she sees other babies passing in their strollers. She bounces up and down and reaches out for them," says her mom, Linda, of Huntington, NY. Sidebar curtain ruffles LEAH MAROHL, 3 MONTHS "Leah coos and smiles when we put her down for a diaper change," says her dad, Dan, of Milwaukee. "We think it's because she loves to look at the bright-yellow curtain ruffles that hang on the window next to the changing table." Sidebar the outdoors MAGGIE SAUM, 2 MONTHS "One day, she was crying, so I carried her outside. She stopped fussing, stared at the pattern of leaves against the sky, and seemed to enjoy the breeze on her face," says her mom, Debra, of Northport, NY. -M.A. Author Affiliation about family issues for national magazines. //
THE MOM LIST // How to get pregnant 1. Donate your last piece of baby equipment to Goodwill. 2. Send your youngest child off to kindergarten with a dance of joy. 3. Start writing the novel you've always dreamed about (or taking piano lessons... or learning to play golf). 4. Spend $500 on a new wardrobe. 5. Get a cat. 6. Let your best friend use the baby name you'd been saving for your next child. The weirdest thing about being sleep-deprived? It affects your ability to be aware that you're sleep-deprived. Most Americans believe that a person isn't a grown-up until age 26 Looks like you're in it for the long haul What we covet now Bottles and burp cloths never had it so good. The Five-Piece Tote diaper bag-yes, it's a diaper bag! -comes with a changing pad, an insulated bottle bag, 11 different compartments, and even a mini Mom Bag just for you. Available in chocolate-and-blueberry, shown, and eight other shades. ($42 Right Start catalog and stores) Hoping for a boy? Have Sex now. (Then cross your fingers.) More boys are conceived in the fall than girls **28;1389;TOOLONG "fam-le-mun n: a surfacing trend among remarrying couples who have children from a previous marriage: They invite the kids along on their honeymoon. Talk about a family affair! Parenting / AOL MOM DEBATE: Are you a better mom than your mom? Nearly 15,000 of you responded: 59% Yes "In my family, every generation gets better. I'm not saying that my mom and my grandmother were bad mothers, but I've learned from them." -JODI MOORE ROCHESTER, NH "I was always expected to be seen and not heard, but I don't want that for my children. They have a say in what's happening in our family. I think this lets them know they matter; I never had that." -CHRISTINE HAMILTON GALLOWAY, OH "I've spent my entire life trying not to be taught me that family comes first." -SUSAN HUMPHREY ANDERSON, IN 41% No "There's no way I could compare with my mother. She had time to be a room mother, trip mother, and cupcake maker. I decided to go back to school, and my children sacrificed many things for me." -SHELLY FORSEE FERNDALE, MI "I don't think I'm better than my mom, nor is she better than I am. Sometimes we do well, and sometimes we mess up. We both do our best." -CHRISTINA RUSSELL KOKOMO, IN "I'm a different kind of mom than my own. I can provide a better life for my children, but I don't have as much time or patience as my mom did." -JENNIFER COLEMAN BUFFALO, NY TELL US! This month's debate: Should parents discipline other people's kids? Share your thoughts-on AOL, select Keyword: Parenting debate. Sidebar BOOK BUZZ Finally! Figure out your husband Men. Such "Don't worry so much. The kids are fine"? Actually, yes, says Michael Gurian, a noted author and therapist, in his new book, What Could He Be Thinking? (St. Martin's Press). Using research on male and female brains, he explains some perplexing behavior, like why men can remember last year's baseball stats but not yesterday's conversation, and more. //
AGES 3-5 // It's cute when Cookie Monster says, "Me want cookie," but if your 3-year-old does it, it may give you pause. Here are some common preschool speech problems, and what you can do to help your child speak better: Problem: Mispronouncing, lisping How it sounds: L's and R's become W's ("rabbit" is "wabbit"); blends like ST and SL are distorted ("stop" is pronounced "top"); S turns into TH or SH ("sing" becomes "thing" or "shing"). What you can do: When your child mispronounces a word, casually repeat it back to him correctly ("Yes, that's a cute rabbit"). When to seek help: Kids aren't expected to master L, R, and S until age 6, so most won't need intervention by then, says Marilyn Agin, M.D., coauthor of The Late Talker. But talk to your pediatrician if your child's tongue protrudes's 3, you still can't understand more than half of what he says. There could be hearing loss, or he may need to see a speech therapist to determine whether weak mouth muscles or immature speech patterns are causing him to mispronounce words. Problem: Most words start with the same sound What it sounds like: One letter is substituted for most consonants. For example, nearly every word starts with D: "I want to go to the store" becomes "Me wan na doh doo duh door." May also replace a whole class of consonants with ones easier to pronounce-i.e., G's come out as D's. What you can do: Casually repeat what your child says using the correct consonant sounds. Also, try modeling lip movements for him and making a game out of having him say difficult sounds in front of a mirror. When to seek help: If the pattern lasts for more than six months. Problem: Stuttering What it sounds like: Words or parts get out. What you can do: Allow your child to finish his sentences. Don't rush him, maintain eye contact, and be sure to bring up open-ended topics like "I'll bet you did fun things at preschool." This way, he's free to answer however he chooses, or not at all. Expect increased stuttering when he's excited. Try to keep up a regular routine, since stress and anxiety can cause your child to stutter more. Use simple sentences and speak slowly when talking about things you know will rile him. When to seek help: Though experts don't know why, many children experience a normal period of stuttering between ages 2 and 4 that can last for about six months, during which they'll repeat entire words ("I want, want, want..."). But even at that age, if he gets stuck on sounds (like "c- c- c-cookie"), there's a long air break in the middle of these conditions last longer than three months, have him checked out. Other signs that your child may have a problem include visible tensing of the face or throat, hand wringing, and foot stomping when he's trying to speak. -CARRIE LORANGER GASKA
. The best sites to save you the time and trouble of trekking to the store. If there's anyone anywhere who doesn't see grocery shopping as grunt work, please come over and get my list. To me, routinely trudging the supermarket aisles is a time- and energy-chomping chore -- not to mention the extra outings for hard-to-find items and super-duper-size stuff. There's another way, though: Let your fingers do the walking -- or clicking -- and shop online. Yes, you'll pay a little more for convenience. Websites either charge for delivery or shipping or build those costs into prices. And it takes a few minutes initially to set up an account and place that first order. But future orders are faster and easier, and online grocers often offer freebies to woo first-time shoppers and discounts to keep them coming back. Even if you don't make online grocery shopping a habit, it can come in handy when the baby's got a fever, the cupboard's bare, and your in-laws are coming for dinner. So check out the others, specialized.) We had moms around the country put them through their paces for you. BEST FOR: Everything from soup to nuts (East Coast and Midwest) Peapod.com is a site for sore eyes, with an attractive selection of both everyday essentials and upmarket extras (heirloom tomatoes, artisan cheeses, even postage stamps). Unlike most sites, you can sort foods by nutritional content, so you can see at a glance, say, which cereal has the least amount of sugar or the most fiber. AREAS SERVED Cities, including Boston, Chicago, Milwaukee, and Washington, D.C. Plug in your zip code to see if your town is eligible. DELIVERY DETAILS * $9.95 (tipping optional) with a $50 minimum order * Groceries arrive within a chosen two-hour period * Next day, if order placed by 8 P.M. * Seven days a week WAYS TO SAVE Sale items (grouped under Specials tab and spotlighted with red tags), value brands, coupons (driver redeems), $1 to $1.50 off for choosing a three-and-a-half-hour delivery window instead of the usual two "I was impressed by their produce. I could actually choose between green and yellow bananas, for instance. And the peaches I ordered looked like they were straight off the truck from Georgia." -- LISA GOLDMAN, MOM OF JAKE, 2 AND SOPHIE, 4 MONTHS, CHICAGO BEST FOR: Everything from soup to nuts (West Coast and Southwest) With more than 25,000 items, the selection at Albertsons.com rivals what you'd find at a typical non-virtual supermarket. It even refills prescriptions (from sister site Savon.com). AREAS SERVED Cities, including Dallas, Los Angeles, Phoenix, and Seattle. Type in your zip code to see if your town is eligible. DELIVERY DETAILS * $9.95 (no tipping), with no minimum purchase * Expect order within a chosen 90-minute period * Next day, if placed by midnight * Seven days a week * Prescriptions within three to seven days WAYS TO SAVE 10 percent off such as 5 percent off on Wednesday deliveries with $100 order, Preferred Savings Card, coupons (enter codes online), steals on store brands "All of my food arrived in perfect condition. Not one of my three dozen eggs were cracked, and my ice cream bars were so cold it was like they'd come straight from my own freezer." -- ANNA COLLETT, MOM OF KEEGAN, 7 KRYSTIANA, 5, KENNA, 3, AND KYLEE, 1 ARLINGTON, TX BEST FOR: Earth mothers and tender tummies You can order your regular lot of nonperishable food, diapers, and detergent, but you'll also find organic and other special items at Netgrocer.com. Feast your eyes on organic mac and cheese, gluten-free bread mix, whole-grain soy flour, kosher juice boxes, or ten types of couscous. AREAS SERVED 50 states, plus APO/FPO (military) addresses SHIPPING DETAILS Cost and shipping times vary by region and order value (though three to five business days is typical). WAYS TOn't find such specialty items as baby meusli or Tom's of Maine products at my local grocery store, so the site saves me from driving all over town with a baby in tow." -- GUENEVERE GEORGE, MOM OF SCHUYLER, 3, AND LORELEI, 1, NASHVILLE BEST FOR: Yummy quick-fix cuisine Schwans.com offers microwave meals even Martha could love. Pretty pictures accompany delectable descriptions, by-the-meal organization, and mom-friendly categories (Family Collections, Balanced Choices, Quick &; Easy, Kids). Don't miss seasonal ice cream flavors (watermelon sherbet with candy seeds, almond-flavored "pink divinity"). AREAS SERVED 48 states DELIVERY DETAILS * No fee besides $1 fuel surcharge; no tipping * Within a four-hour period Monday to Saturday * Limit of one delivery every two weeks in some areas WAYS TO SAVE Free entree for first-timers, multimeal sizes in resealable bags, "Mix or Match" savings on two or three similar items, points (two per dollar spent) to use for discounts on toys the food is so much better than what I buy at the store that I'm willing to pay extra. And you can't beat having complete dinners delivered to your front door." -- KIMBERLY HICKS, MOM OF MATTHEW, 5, DANIEL, 2 AND JOHN, 5 MONTHS, CUMMING, GA BEST FOR: Stocking up on staples Forget the forklift for your bulk buys. Buythecase.net does the heavy lifting and packaging. Goods include nonperishable food, baby items, paper goods, personal products, cleaning supplies, and batteries. AREAS SERVED 48 states, plus military addresses worldwide SHIPPING DETAILS * Cost varies by zip code and weight, although free to many addresses (mainly in the Northeast) * $4.99 handling on orders under $100 * Usually takes five business days WAYS TO SAVE Check website for specials "If you prefer particular brands, this isn't the site for you. But if you can go with what it has at any given time, you'll save time, money, and hassle detergent bottles back from the store for a while!" -- ANDREA MESSINA, PARENTING STAFFER, MOM OF TEDDY, 10, JOSIE, 7, AND BENJY, 7 BOX FOR BETTER ONLINE SHOPPING * Pay attention to size -- especially when it comes to perishables. A cup and a tub of yogurt, for instance, may look the same in online photos, so make sure you know just how much you're getting before buying more than you can use. * Save lists of your "favorite foods" on the site (most have this function); it'll cut down your shopping time considerably in the future. * See whether paper coupons are valid online. * Find out if you have to be home to accept your goods -- some sites don't require it. You can click a box for "unattended" delivery or shipping, and the order will be left at your door. * If delivery isn't available in your area, check on whether the site offers a pick-up'll be ready for you to take home from a local store. * Think twice about online shopping if you've got a dial-up connection. So many pictures need to be loaded that it may take less time to drive to the store. -- LYNYA FLOYD Author Affiliation Anne Reeks Lynya Floyd Illustration STUART McCLYMONT/GETTY; PHOTO CORBIS; PHOTO JUDITH HAEUSLER/GETTY; PHOTO //
One notable sidelight of the 1992 presidential election in the United States was that the three main candidates were left-handed. Had Bill Clinton, George Bush, and Ross Perot all been right-handed, their directional bias would have attracted no attention. Yet because only about one in ten persons is left-handed, the odds against three southpaws all seeking the job are only about 1 in 1,000. (Of forty-one American presidents who took the oath of office prior to 1993, only four -- James Garfield, Harry Truman, Gerald Ford, and George Bush -- demonstrated a strong preference for using the left hand.) Words and phrases that originally stem from an awareness of handedness -- words such as dexterity, adroit, sinister, gauche, and right-hand man -- abound in Western languages, suggesting a deeply rooted fascination with human handedness. Unfortunately, the connotations of terms such as gauche and sinister (which derive from "left") put left-handers in an awkward or even unsavory light; they are outside the norm. In addition, many artifacts of our modern culture,, are designed and manufactured with little regard for the lefty minority among us. Until about twenty years ago, many anthropologists, biologists, and cognitive scientists took for granted the notion that humans were distinct from the rest of the animal kingdom by virtue of what is called behavioral lateralization, or behavioral asymmetry -- the tendency to favor one hand (or foot or eye) over the other for certain tasks. In the mid-1800s, the French physicians Paul Broca and Marc Dax showed that handedness was related to the division of the brain into two hemispheres, each of which oversees or is dominant for certain functions. More than a century of research on humans has firmly established the link between the brain's hemispheres and physical actions such as throwing, kicking, and writing. Despite many anecdotal accounts of handedness among nonhuman animals, few researchers, until quite recently, advocated the view that animals, too, display definite right-left behavioral differences. Growing evidence suggests that such differences are common among animals, and the expression that these differences have had a long evolutionary history. But just how long has handedness been around? Archeological records -- paintings, drawings, and carvings of humans engaged in activities involving the use of hands -- indicate that humans have been predominantly right-handed for more than 5,000 years. In ancient Egyptian artwork, for example, the right hand is depicted as the dominant one in about 90 percent of examples. Fracture or wear patterns on tools also indicate that a majority of ancient people were right-handed. Cro-Magnon cave paintings some 27,000 years old commonly show outlines of human hands made by placing one hand against the cave wall and applying paint with the other hand. Children today make similar outlines of their hands with crayons on paper. With few exceptions, left hands of Cro-Magnons are displayed on cave walls, indicating that the paintings were usually done by right-handers. Anthropological evidence pushes the record of handedness in early human ancestors back to at least 1.4 million years ago. One important line of evidence comes from flaking patterns of clockwise motion (indicating a right-handed toolmaker) can be distinguished from those flaked with a counterclockwise rotation (indicating a left-handed toolmaker). Even scratches found on fossil human teeth offer clues. Ancient humans are thought to have cut meat into strips by holding it between their teeth and slicing it with stone knives, as do the present-day Inuit of Greenland. Occasionally the knives slip and leave scratches on the users' teeth. Scratches made with a left-to-right stroke direction (by right-handers) are more common than scratches in the opposite direction (made by left-handers). Still other evidence comes from cranial morphology: scientists think that physical differences between the right and left sides of the interior of the skull indicate subtle physical differences between the two sides of the brain. The variation between the hemispheres corresponds to which side of the body is used to perform specific activities. Such studies, as well as studies of tool use, indicate that right- or left-sided dominance is not exclusive to modern Homo sapiens. Populations of Neanderthals and erectus and Homo habilis, seem to have been predominantly right-handed, as we are. In addition, many living monkeys and apes seem to be left-hand dominant when reaching for food or other objects, but right-hand dominant when manipulating objects. For example, chimpanzees, when using sticks to excavate for termites, preferentially use one of their hands, commonly the right. The tendency of human females to carry their babies in their left arms (whereas men tend to carry babies in their right arms) may have been evolutionary roots: female chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans also carry their babies in their left arms. Even among nonprimates, both living and extinct, asymmetry of body parts may be related to patterns of behavior. The asymmetrical tusks of Pleistocene, or Ice Age, elephants; the asymmetrical, paired teeth in some worms; and the asymmetrical, hard mouth structures of the extinct eellike conodonts may reflect a tendency of these animals to favor one side while gathering food. Similarly, in crustaceans such as (although lobsters can conveniently switch their handedness if a claw is lost). In invertebrates, spirally shaped shells or other hard parts, which are perhaps related to behavioral asymmetry, are found in numerous species, including sea lilies, corals, and such mollusks as snails, clams, and oysters. Fruitful sources of information about animal behavior are trace fossils, such as tracks, trails, burrows, borings, and bite marks, which are records of animal activity. Recently, trace fossils have been studied in attempts to establish whether prehistoric animals had any right-left biases in their behavior. Spiral burrows uncovered in Miocene rocks, some 5 to 23 million years old, in the midwestern United States show that the beavers that constructed the burrows consistently used either right- or left-sided strokes of their chisellike front teeth. Although individual burrows spiraled either clockwise or counterclockwise, the total number of burrows going in each direction was about equal. Trace fossils have revealed many other examples of spiral coiling, indicating that asymmetrical behavior was living ones. The best-documented and oldest example of behavioral "handedness" among fossil animals comes from healed injuries, particularly scars left by predators, preserved on trilobites more than 500 million years old. A group of extinct marine arthropods, trilobites are distantly related to present-day crustaceans and horseshoe crabs. Richard A. Robison, of the University of Kansas, and I recently studied healed injuries on trilobite fossils. We were able to distinguish healed injuries from other kinds of malformations -- genetic or embryological abnormalities and swellings due to disease or parasitism -- because injuries are characterized by obvious physical breaks in the trilobites' crusty exoskeletons that have subsequently healed, usually by "callusing" over. Trilobites with such healed injuries are therefore the ones that survived injury and lived to tell the tale as fossils. (We can not identify fatal injuries caused by predation because they lack signs of repair and can resemble breaks made after death by scavengers or by physical forces that moved and damaged the carcasses.) Healed injuries of trilobites are of from mouths and pinches from claws or grasping appendages), and those due to accidental injuries incurred during molting, copulation, or combat. In our trilobite study, Robison and I attributed injuries to unsuccessful predation only if they were located on a part of the body that was unlikely to have been accidentally broken, if they covered a large part of the body, and if they were not just simple breaks that might be expected from an accident. We discovered that injuries due to accidents occur randomly on trilobite remains, but injuries due to predation do not. Scars left by the teeth and claws of predators are most common near the edges, on the rear, and on the right side of a trilobite. What creatures in Paleozoic seas preyed upon trilobites? One predator frequently implicated is Anomalocaris, which was first described from fossils of the Burgess Shale in British Columbia. This animal hunted trilobites during the Early to Middle Cambrian period, some 570 to 517 million years ago (see "Terror of the An important piece of circumstantial evidence for this link is that the size and shape of many bite marks on trilobites from this site and time match the size and shape of the circular, nutcracker-like mouthparts of Anomalocaris. Also, many North American fossil-bearing rocks of Cambrian age that contain bitten trilobites also contain the remains of Anomalocaris, further supporting the idea that at twenty inches long, this carnivore was one of the major predators of trilobites of its time. But Anomalocaris was not the sole scourge of Cambrian trilobites. Broken plates of trilobite exoskeletons have been found in the gut contents of other arthropod fossils from the Burgess Shale and from Utah. Early forms of chelicerates (relatives of the horseshoe crab) and crustaceans (relatives of shrimps, crabs, and lobsters) also preyed on trilobites. After the Cambrian and before the end of the Paleozoic era (when trilobites became extinct), various fishes, cephalopods, and arthropods probably preyed on trilobites. Several Cambrian trilobites and the Ordovician trilobite Isotelus (the state invertebrate their own right or even cannibals. All trilobites had a large, usually calcified plate, known as a labrum, in front of and on the underside of the mouth. But unlike those of most other trilobites, the labrum of Isotelus was fork shaped and equipped with beveled, sharp, and serrated edges, remarkably similar to the cutting surface of a steak knife or a miniature tooth of the dinosaur Tyrannosaurus rex. Why are most predation scars preserved on the edges, right side, and rear end of trilobites? Most vital organs -- such as the brain, nerve cord, and parts of the digestive and circulatory systems -- of trilobites lie in an elongate, raised section called the axial lobe, which runs down the middle of the body. Any substantial injury to the axial lobe probably would have been fatal, and the trilobite therefore would not have joined our sample of fossil specimens. In contrast, the pleural lobes, which run down either side of the axial lobe, house a few vital healed readily. Of trilobites showing predation scars, approximately 70 percent have injuries confined to the right side. Provided that a sufficiently large sample is collected, this pattern holds true whether one analyzes all trilobites, trilobites of a single time period, or even trilobites found within a single rock formation. This asymmetry in scarring can not be attributed to the presence of an unpaired vital organ on the body's left side, which, if breached, would have resulted in the death of the victim. Beautifully preserved trilobites collected from sites as far-flung as China, British Columbia, Utah, New York State, and Germany show that all of the vital organs contained in the pleural lobes were paired. We also find more nonlethal predation scars on the rear end of trilobites than on the head, which contains the brain, stomach, and other organs. In fleeing from a pursuing predator, a trilobite probably veered to one side to protect its head. On such a moving target, the tail shield, or but the part least likely to sustain a deadly bite. The strong lateral asymmetry of predation scars is most likely due to handedness in either the predators or the trilobites or perhaps in both. Today, many animal species or populations seem to have stable patterns of asymmetrical behavior; extinct creatures probably possessed similar behavioral biases. Because of differences in the expression of handedness among various groups of animals, however, not all of those patterns are likely to have been inherited through a common ancestry. Rather, they probably arose at various times as the result of similar ecological pressures exerted on distantly related animals. The tendency for predation scars to be on the right side of trilobites suggests that the predators, at least the less successful ones whose "misses" we study, preferred to attack or bite on that side first. If biting were the mode of attack, surely those predators deserved to be considered sinister, for they tended to bite from the left side of the mouth. Also possible is that a fleeing a particular direction. Such turning may have consistently exposed one side of the body to attack. A combination is also possible -- one-sided evasion by the prey and one-sided attack by the predator. Predators may have learned to anticipate the escape behavior of individuals belonging to favorite prey species and then honed their attack strategies to compensate for it. This may partly account for one of the most curious aspects of handedness: despite the predominance of a directional bias in some species, a certain percentage of individuals deviate from the norm, thus insuring that some individuals of the species will survive, even if predators have figured out the general pattern of escape. When considering the evolutionary history of handedness, the question of heritability arises. Is handedness inherited? It must be to some extent; otherwise, species would not maintain similar proportions of right- and left-handed individuals through numerous, successive generations. That the same proportion of right- and left-handed individuals would crop up randomly time after time is certainly unlikely. Studies suggest that left-handedness does percent of children born to right-handed parents are themselves right-handed. Where one parent is left-handed, the proportion of right-handers drops to about 80 percent. And if both parents are left-handed, that proportion drops to about 75 percent. Present evidence indicates that handedness can be inherited in a least two ways. The first, which is shown by the "handedness" of the mouths of cichlid fishes from East Africa's Lake Tanganyika, is by simple genetic recombination in which the normal pattern of Mendelian inheritance applies. Because these scale-eating fishes attack their prey from behind, right-sided cichlids snatch scales from the left side of their prey, whereas left-sided cichlids snatch scales from the right side. The ratio of right- and left-sided cichlids at any one time is influenced by the prey's alertness; the rarer type of cichlid (either right- or left-sided) is more successful at predation. If right-siders are rarer initially, their reproductive success increases and their population grows. Once the population becomes sufficiently large, however, the prey become advantage switches to the now rarer left-siders. The second way of inheriting handedness is shown in some snails and single-celled ciliates. In these organisms, the direction of coiling or spiraling has been shown to be inherited in the structure of the cell and controlled by the mother's genes (not by the normal means of Mendelian inheritance). In this case, handedness is determined even before fertilization occurs. Another question is whether handedness is adaptive; that is, does it confer some ecological or evolutionary advantage? The evidence -- from the asymmetry of predation scars more than half a billion years old, and the occurrence of handedness or sidedness in organisms as diverse as animals, plants, bacteria, one-celled protists, and probably even fungi -- suggests that it does. In humans, the species in which handedness has been studied most, correlations commonly have been made between hemispheres of the brain, hand dominance, and language development. In addition, a trend toward manipulating tools in a consistent way may result in greater movement may not even be possible if an organism is perfectly symmetrical. Rather, one side must always take the lead. Which side leads may be irrelevant, but if one limb is stronger or used more consistently than the other for a particular activity, that limb will become the lead side. Even in ambidextrous individuals, one side must lead, although which side does the leading is inconsistent. Quite possibly, handedness itself is not adaptive, but it may be linked to some other feature that is adaptive. Most snail species are predominantly coiled to the right, but right- and left-sided shells are not true mirror images of each other structurally. In some, shell shape and coiling direction of the internal organs seem to be independent, and the rarity of left-sided individuals is probably related to problems associated with trying to squeeze an animal whose internal structures are best suited to a right-coiled shell into a left-sided shell instead. So, is it better to be right- or left-handed? Among humans, surely some disadvantages extent that any tool constructed for use by a right-hander may be cumbersome for a left-hander to manipulate. Yet left-handedness can carry some distinct advantages; witness the disproportionately large number of gifted athletes, intellectuals, artists, and perhaps politicians -- like the 1992 U.S. presidential candidates -- who are left-handed. While no direct evolutionary advantage seems to accrue specifically to right- or left-dominance in any animal species over the long-term, an advantage does seem to be conferred merely by having a handedness.
Like an old-time preacher, David Sloan Wilson has the appearance of a man with mission. An evolutionary biologist at the State University of New York at Binghamton, Wilson is given to marching up and down, flailing his arms, and proclaiming passionately, even in informal conversation. His message is as clear as it is bold: A whole generation of evolutionary biologists has been misled into believing that natural selection grinds inexorably at the level of individual interests, and only at that level. Instead, Wilson argues, biologists must recognize that groups of organisms have evolutionary interests, too, and that natural selection sometimes operates at this "higher" level. "Group selection" means that, occasionally, individuals within a group -- for instance, an ant colony, a baboon troop, a nomadic band of human hunter-gatherers, or even a human population united by a common culture -- may sacrifice their own reproductive future if, by doing so, the group benefits This benefit comes through increased fitness, that is, through contributing more offspring to the next generation than cooperate if the common end enhances the group's fitness. For more than twenty years, Wilson has been working unceasingly -- initially very much as a loner, but now with a growing band of supporters -- advocating a theory that has been viewed by some as nothing less than heretical. Although much of his writing is couched in the arcane language of mathematical models, Wilson is concerned with a form of behavior that is very basic and, intuitively anyway, easily understood: altruism. Humans may pride themselves on being genuinely altruistic, selflessly helping others, whether it is by dying for one's country or giving a couple of dollars to homeless person on the street. But, modern evolutionary biologists ask, can animals other than humans be described a sometimes acting altruistically? Is the honeybee that dies in the act of stinging an intruder to the hive being altruistic? And what of a lioness that suckles the young of others in the pride as well as her own? Humans think of altruism as doing good deny such motives to other animals. Two decades ago, Harvard biologist Edward O. Wilson proclaimed in his important and controversial book Sociobiology: The New Synthesis that altruism is "the central theoretical problem" of evolutionary biology in a social context. Darwin was aware of apparently altruistic behaviors in nature. His theory of evolution by natural selection is principal about the survival of individuals in the "struggle for existence," in which they a always seeking ways of promoting the own reproductive success. Nevertheless he recognized that individuals might sometimes act selflessly if, as a result, the success of the group is promoted instead. In The Descent of Man, Darwin used this line of argument to explain the evolution of morality. If this sounds uncannily like David Sloan Wilson's position, it is. So why has Wilson been called a heretic for championing something that Darwin expressed a century ago? How is it, as Wilson recently noted, that "the rejection of group selection was treated as a scientific advance comparable to was kept alive as an example how not to think?" During the century following the publication of The Descent of Man, Darwin's clear vision of group selection was superseded by a fuzzy view of life as a harmonious enterprise, with individuals acting toward a collective good. Most scientists, for instance, saw territoriality as individuals acting to control the density of the population for the good of all. Similarly, dominance hierarchies -- the pecking orders so common among social animals -- were seen as a means of reducing wasteful conflicts within the group. This naive version of group selection culminated in the 1962 publication of V.C. Wynne-Edwards's classic book, Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. Wynne-Edwards proposed that attributes of all social groups were subject to the forces of natural selection. His book was the target of immediate and blistering attack, for by then a new generation of evolutionary biologists had arisen. These scientists, building on a foundation of mathematical population genetics that increasingly emphasized the importance of individual selection, demolished among the opponents was George C. Williams, of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, who took on group selection in his 1966 book Adaptation and Natural Selection. Williams argued that, although a theoretical possibility, selection at the level of the group was an insignificant evolutionary force compared with individual selection. One reason was that the rate of evolution is far higher at the level of the individual than at that of the group; another was that, for the most part, groups are rather fluid, with members often moving between them, thus diluting the group as an evolving entity. Moreover, a group of altruists could easily be exploited by a sneakily selfish individual bent on boosting its own reproductive output at the expense of others holding back for the sake of the group. If group selection were important, reasoned Williams, we would expect populations of sexually reproducing species to contain more females than males. This is because the number of reproductively active females -- not the number of males -- ultimately, in evolutionary terms, the more successfully reared offspring there are in a group, the more successful that group is. Under individual selection, an even sex ratio is predicted (as a result of a balance in the struggle by individuals to maximize their own reproductive success through their offspring). And, Williams observed, an even ratio of males to females is what is most often seen in the world. With the publication of The Selfish Gene in 1976, Oxford University biologist Richard Dawkins moved the focus of natural selection even further away from the group. For Dawkins, it is not just individuals but the genes within them that matter. More ammunition against group selection came with the development of kin selection and game theory, mathematical models that were designed to explain altruism and cooperative behavior. The theory of kin selection has deep roots, going back principally to the insights of another Oxford biologist, William Hamilton, and fellow Brit John Maynard Smith, of the University of Sussex. Maynard Smith and Hamilton measure of its reproductive opportunity to enhance that of another, the donor -- or at least some of its genes -- may actually benefit if it is a relative of the recipient of the favor. Game theory (originally a method developed by mathematicians to examine economic cooperation and conflict among humans) showed that even unrelated individuals cooperate while looking to their own interests. Robert Trivers, then at Harvard University, used this approach in developing the notion of reciprocal altruism, or "I'll scratch your back now because you scratched mine a while ago and I expect you to scratch mine again." The era of the individual in evolutionary biology was thus firmly established and was apparently unassailable. Ethologists entered field studies confident that this theoretical perspective would powerfully inform what they would observe, particularly among primate species. "It's true. It was powerful," says Barbara Smuts, a primatologist at the University of Michigan, who has studied chimpanzees and baboons in East Africa." But sometimes you had to stretch, she doubted that a short-term, narrow view of self-interests could explain some features of alliances between males and females, because even after a long period of devotion to a female, a male has no guarantee that he will enjoy her mating favors in the future. Like many others, though, Smuts says, "I just thought that when I had more data it would be okay. I never thought bout group selection .... No one did." Frans de Waal, of the Yerkes Primate Center in Atlanta, recalls someone once describing a primate society as being like a transparent organism. "It was a powerful metaphor," he now says, "thinking of the group as an organism. But we weren't allowed to talk like that A generation of field researchers felt the same: most accepted that group selection was discredited, and a few nursed curiosity about it but kept quiet for fear of appearing intellectually unsound. Meanwhile, David Sloan Wilson had been laboring at his theoretical last since the believed eschewed the naivete of earlier models. Wilson argues that the fundamental issue is the "vehicle" of selection. An individual, for instance, consists of a population of cells, but insofar as those cells share a common fate, in an evolutionary sense, the individual -- and not the cells -- is properly seen as the vehicle of selection. Similarly, a long-term alliance, or friendship, between a male and female baboon can be considered a vehicle because they share a common fate in the reproductive success that stems from the alliance. The female members of a pride of lions may also be a vehicle because their fitness depends on the fitness of their group, in terms of hunting success and protection against outside attack. An entire social group of vervet monkeys, for instance, may be a vehicle in their joint foraging and defense. Group selection works, Wilson says, when groups are competing but not when they are in isolation. Suppose an individual within an isolated group provisions the offspring of fitness. Even though the overall fitness of the group is enhanced, the behavior will not be selected because it is not to the advantage of the individual doing it. However, Wilson argues, if the group is in competition with other such groups, the behavior will be selected because the group as a whole has an advantage relative to other groups. One of the most persuasive examples of group selection in nature, argues Wilson, is the evolution of virulence in parasites. It is in a parasite's Darwinian interest to reproduce as bountifully as is compatible with high transmission to other hosts. A strain that multiplies too fast may rapidly kill off its host, thereby reducing its chances of transmission to other hosts. Imagine two mice, each infected with a different strain of a certain parasite. Multiplying rapidly, the more virulent strain will have greater reproductive success than the less virulent one. Because its host-mouse soon expires, however, transmission to other mice will be lower than that of the less virulent parasite but lower virulence between them. "If group selection were a negligible force in disease evolution, then parasites would evolve to maximize their virulence and the notion of optimal virulence would be irrelevant," observe David Wilson and University of Wisconsin philosopher Elliot Sober. Further support for group selection comes from the group behavior of social insects and the discovery of female-biased sex ratios in a variety of organisms, including fig wasps, hummingbird flower mites, and social spiders. The main body of evolutionary biologists, however, remains convinced that individual-level selection is the key to understanding social organization and behavior and rejects group selection as wrongheaded thinking. Dawkins is blunt in his response to Wilson's version of group selection, writing recently that he is "baffled by... the sheer, wanton, head-in-bag perversity of the position." Williams points out that from his calculations and observations, group selection occupies only a tiny corner of the world of evolution. "It's not a matter of logical correctness," he says. "overstates the importance of group selection." Maynard Smith is critical of Wilson for causing "more confusion than clarity by using the term group selection in many different ways," but he also praises him for being "one of the few who has made the subject interesting again." Meanwhile, Wilson is making converts. "My resistance crumbled immediately, as soon as I saw what he was saying," recalls Smuts, who was witness to one of Wilson's informal, passionate expositions at a 1994 gathering of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society. "The logic of the vehicle of selection, at different levels, is very persuasive." She was particularly drawn to the shifts in focus from within-group competition to within-group cooperation that might occur for an individual at different times and under different circumstances, particularly in intelligent species. "Male chimpanzees are a good example," Smuts explains. "At any time, the community might be challenged by another group, so that individual interest in competing with in favor of collective group protection." De Waal finds himself sympathetic to group selection but is still waiting to see how it might be a more powerful explanatory perspective than individual selection. He recently published Good Natured, a book on the evolution of morality in human and nonhuman primates. "Human morality is a classic case of something imposed on individuals for the well-being of the community," he explains. "Individuals benefit from a strong, united community, and that is why the community is valued so highly in our moral system." This might be seen as an example of what some anthropologists call cultural group selection. Like humans, de Waal says, chimpanzees appear to value harmony in their social group. When peace is disrupted, often by bouts between competing males, a female acting as mediator may bring the two males together -- sometimes diffusing the rising tension, sometimes effecting a reconciliation after an all-out fight. For instance, she might begin grooming one of the combatants, gradually luring him drawn together, she will use her considerable, subtle social skills to get the two males to groom each other. Such intervention is a tricky and sometimes risky business. "It is a striking example of an individual taking care of relationships in which the mediator is not herself directly involved," observes de Waal. "This is what moral systems do all the time." Nevertheless, de Waal sees such cases of rudimentary morality "as an outcome of individual-level selection because the female benefits from a harmonious social context." Can human morality also be viewed as a result of individual-level selection, although expressed more generally and with more force because of language? "I suspect there is an interplay between individual and group selection in primate social systems," de Waal speculates, "but we haven't worked out what it is yet." Anthropologists are deeply split over the place of group selection in human society. Some, such as Christopher Boehm of the University of Southern California, believe it has societies. "The egalitarian social structure you see in a foraging society is the result of the group's preventing its leaders from becoming dominant," argues Boehm. Richard Alexander, of the University of Michigan, points out that nobody "knows if group selection has been important in determining the genetic makeup of modern humans .... If it has been important, it has likely involved direct intergroup competition and hostility of the sort we've seen all across history." The foray into the human realm inevitably muddies the waters of the group selection debate because of the thick overlay of culture. When one anthropologist points out that humans readily die for their country, supposedly demonstrating altruism for the good of the group, another reminds us that it is usually the poor who fight wars for the benefit of the rich and that if the poor choose not to fight, they may be flung in jail. Moreover, recent studies reveal that a person is much more likely to, say, give money to beggars when accompanied) than when alone. The motive here seems to be to enhance the social standing of the giver. Donald Campbell, of Lehigh University, speaks for many when he says he expects there is a biological underpinning to many aspects of human social behavior as a result of group selection. An admirer of Wilson and Sober's work, he is disappointed that their arguments don't yet illuminate the way. He would like to see group selection in the human realm made "more explicitly plausible." Finally, the sociological dimension of the group selection debate can not be ignored, as psychiatrist Randolph Nesse, of the University of Michigan, observes. "It's not surprising that Wilson and Sober want to see human altruism as the result of group selection," he says. "Many people do. The discovery that some altruism isn't genuinely altruistic but is instead fundamentally selfish is deeply disturbing. Some would find comfort if we were able to reconcile our moral feelings with biological reality, but unfortunately it have to accept this reality and not seek to change the science to suit our feelings. Not surprisingly, Wilson rejects this line of argument. "One of the great insights that is going to come out of group selection is that morality will be justified at face value," he says. "That is, it's a system designed to benefit the common good. But, you shouldn't think I'm a hopeless romantic, because a lot of nasty things are the result of group selection as well, including the ability to inflict genocide."
A faucet is locked, above, to protect a valuable amenity piped water Opposite page: Karen Josefat carries water up to her home on Mwanza's Capri Point. // Nyamutondo Gaspari is now one of the lucky ones in Mwanza, Tanzania -- she has a private water tap outside her small house. But until recently, this young mother of four could not afford such a luxury. When we first met, she complained to me of chronic leg and lower back pain, which she attributed to the strain of carrying water. Every day, Nyamutondo, her ten-year-old daughter (her eldest child), and another young girl who lived with the family would go to fetch four five-gallon buckets of water for their household. Usually they paid a fee to draw from a neighborhood tap, but on days when water was scarce, they walked half a mile down from their house on Bugando Hill to fill their buckets directly from nearby Lake Victoria. "Sometimes you reach the source of water only to be told there is no water here, no water there water refuse to sell what they have. Sometimes you go there and they are closed. We never know how far we will have to go to fetch water." Given those difficulties, Nyamutondo carefully monitored her household's water use. "Because I have small children and they still wet the bed, I have to use one bucket for washing clothes," she told me. "We use the other three buckets for bathing. Each one of us takes a small share of a bucket. Any remaining water I use to wash dishes, to cook, and to boil drinking water." Sometimes, if she hadn't earned enough from working as a tomato vendor to buy sufficient water, Nyamutondo did her family's laundry in the lake. Obtaining clean water in Mwanza, a city of an estimated 419,000 residents, is a problem in part because the existing water and sewage facilities are out of date, in disrepair, and not integrated. Designed in 1967, the sewage system was built's population at the time. Today it serves about 80,000 people-more than five times its intended capacity but only a fifth of the burgeoning population. The majority of residents must rely on septic tanks or pit toilets-or simply on the outdoors. The sewage system was supposed to pipe waste outside the city for treatment, but the pumps required for this step broke down in 1990. Now some 925,000 gallons of raw sewage pour each day into a river canal that feeds into Lake Victoria near Mwanza's busy downtown. Schoolchildren race across three narrow pipes that span the sewage-laden canal, daring one another to risk a fall into the murky waters below, while women selling fruits and peanuts nearby ignore the stench. Meanwhile, just over a mile away, water is pumped from the lake for domestic use. Lake water, the main source for the city, is piped to about eight thousand connections, including scattered public standpipes. This piped water serves about half the population; the rest depend on shallow wells, water taken extent, rivers and springs. Water treatment consists of chlorination (an antiquated filtration system broke down years ago and was never replaced). Calcium hypochlorite is stirred into a bucket of water and then added to one of the small vats that feed the city's two supply tanks, which together hold 800,000 gallons. Although this task is usually performed several times a day, it is impossible to accurately monitor how thoroughly the disinfecting chemical gets mixed into the contents of the tanks before water is pumped into the city's distribution system. Many people take the precaution of boiling and filtering their drinking water. Since only the wealthy have electricity in their homes, most city residents who want to boil their water must consume precious fuel, purchasing charcoal or scouring the already strained landscape for firewood. Inevitably, they minimize their water use or resort to unpurified water, which can precipitate illnesses such as intestinal worms, typhoid, schistosomiasis, and cholera. Statistics are hard to come by, but those from a 1996 study the southern part of Mwanza Municipality, are disturbing. Fourteen percent of the children up to the age of fourteen were infected with schistosome worms, while 25 percent had hookworms or roundworms. According to another study, there were 1,124 cases of cholera in Mwanza during the first six weeks of 1998, and these resulted in at least fifty deaths. Lacking an adequate supply of pure water, Nyamutondo was not always able to follow hygienic practices she knew would benefit her family's health. "Some of the people in the household may not bathe daily, although they usually bathe by the next day," she explained. "It does depend on whether there is enough water in the household, and water availability depends on money. Sometimes you don't have enough money to buy the things you need to boil the water, and you just have to drink the water as it is. That is why you find that children often fall sick." Several years earlier, Nyamutondo and her husband, Gaspari the four that survived suffered frequently from diarrhea. Photograph A faucet is locked, above, to protect a valuable amenity piped water Opposite page: Karen Josefat carries water up to her home on Mwanza's Capri Point. // "Personal body hygiene is worse in Mwanza than almost anywhere I've been," says Peter LeJacq, who worked for ten years in the community health department of Mwanza's Bugando Medical Center. You experience all these diseases in Tanzania that you don't experience in countries where water is more available and soap and toilet paper more affordable. Those three commodities determine body hygiene. "An American priest and doctor working for the Maryknoll Missionaries, LeJacq confronted a sanitation and public health nightmare when he arrived at Bugando Medical Center in 1987. The center, with eight hundred beds, was one of the four best-equipped hospitals in Tanzania to which patients could be referred. Built at the top of Bugando Hill, it was often the first place in the city to lose water during electrical," LeJacq recalls. "People were carrying buckets of water on their heads from the storage tank, and that was being filled by the fire truck, which would come and put some dirty lake water in it each day." Lack of water affected not only medical hygiene but also the most basic sanitation and cleaning. "Many of the more than 150 toilets in the hospital weren't working," LeJacq says. "When we opened the locked stalls, we found dead rodents and putrefied human waste. What they used to do, when the flushing mechanism was broken, was to use old soup ladles to scoop out the waste. Then they put it in buckets and dumped it in a hole outside the hospital." LeJacq and the other staff members immediately set about raising funds and implementing improvements in sanitation and water. "We simply, as medical missionaries, were able to keep screaming that water is a priority," he explains. "No, a CAT scan is not telephone system is not important-water." Over the following years, plumbing was improved and sanitation facilities were repaired. In 1994 private electric- and diesel-powered pumps were finally installed at the base of the hill to ensure that water would be pumped up to the hospital even when city pumps were not functioning. Then LeJacq learned just how precious water-supply equipment can be. Within three weeks of installation, one of the hospital's new pumps was stolen. "The tires were new, according to the tracks," he recalls. "These were not poor people stealing the pump. We could not put this off to people trying to feed their children." Fortunately, the pump was replaced within the year, and the pump house is now surrounded by a cage. Standards of sanitation and hygiene at the hospital have been raised significantly. Nyamutondo Gaspari saw her family's health improve a year ago, when the household obtained a connection to the city's piped water supply. With help from a local charity, install the necessary pipes-which, unfortunately, were stolen within twenty-four hours. They had enough savings to try again, and this time they knew to bury them in deeper trenches. The family can now bathe daily and wash clothes and dishes promptly. The children suffer less from diarrhea, and Nyamutondo no longer experiences the back pain she developed from balancing a water jug on her head. Freed from having to fetch water, Nyamutondo can spend more time selling tomatoes, potatoes, and other products, while her eldest daughter can sleep later in the morning and has more time to study after school. A few neighbors now purchase water from the family's tap. Photograph Like other hillside communities in Mwanza, Bugando Hill, left, suffers whenever the city's water pumps fail. Far left: A young boy cuts cassava while his friends play along the shore of Lake Victoria. Below:Juliana Paskali helps her granddaughter balance a jug on her head. Photograph Like other hillside communities in Mwanza, Bugando Hill, left, left: A young boy cuts cassava while his friends play along the shore of Lake Victoria. Below:Juliana Paskali helps her granddaughter balance a jug on her head. Photograph Like other hillside communities in Mwanza, Bugando Hill, left, suffers whenever the city's water pumps fail. Far left: A young boy cuts cassava while his friends play along the shore of Lake Victoria. Below:Juliana Paskali helps her granddaughter balance a jug on her head. Photograph Nyamutondo Gaspari (seated, right) allows a neighbor to bathe at her private tap. Below, right: Sabina Mapesa boils water for cooking. Photograph Nyamutondo Gaspari (seated, right) allows a neighbor to bathe at her private tap. Below, right: Sabina Mapesa boils waterf or cooking. // Connecting to the city water system is beyond the means of the average Mwanza resident, however. Most rely instead on the city's public standpipes, a service that was originally free and for which there is now a nominal charge (filling a five-gallon bucket. For years, the system has been prone to breakdown. Shadrack Shoo, the former municipal water engineer for Mwanza, explains: "Sometimes it is a problem of electricity; sometimes it simply takes time to do the repair." The city rests on an undulating landscape of clay valleys and round granite hills rising as much as 300 feet above Lake Victoria, and neighborhoods at high elevations suffer the most during electricity cuts, for they depend on booster stations to pump water uphill. Residents have responded by developing an efficient informal system in which people fetch and distribute water for a fee. "Normally that is illegal, as only the government is allowed to sell water," remarks Shoo, "but they are doing it as a practice, and it is not easy to tell them not to." Even the water vendors do not know from day to day how they will obtain water. One vendor who serves the community on Bugando Hill likes to obtain water from the city tanks at the. Here he can both save money and minimize the effort required to transport water in jugs strapped onto his three-speed bike. When these tanks are empty, the vendor rides halfway down the hill to a church where he obtains water for a slightly higher fee. Often this option is also exhausted, however, and he has to look elsewhere. For a time, he was able to get water from a construction site at the hospital, where laborers and guards sold off water supplied by the hospital's private tanks. Photograph Above, left: A woman bathes her son. Above: Nyamutondo prepares vegetables // Depending on the source, this young man sells water for four to ten times what he paid for it. Usually he charges 100 Tanzanian shillings (about fifteen cents) for a five-gallon bucket. Such high prices are common throughout the developing world, where the unit cost of vended water can be anywhere from four to twentyfive times the cost of water from a piped city supply. People with piped because water authorities often do not have the staff, equipment, or transportation to collect fees systematically. People with piped water may in turn sell it to neighbors and vendors at great profit, so the poorest people in the community end up paying the most for the least amount of water. Poor planning, financial limitations, inadequate training, mismanagement, and corruption have all contributed to the poor maintenance of (and failure to improve) water and sanitation facilities in many developing nations. But with financial assistance promised by the European Union and the World Bank, improvements are being initiated in Mwanza's water and sewer services. A massive water-storage tank is to be built at the army base on Nyamashana Hill, enabling the Bugando Hill community and others at high elevations to receive water via gravitational flow even during electric shortages. At the Lake Victoria intake point, a diesel generator will be installed to supply the main network with water when the electricity fails. To improve water quality, both the waste treatment facilities and and expanded, and new water filtration equipment is to be installed. Even with these improvements, however, neither the water nor the sewage system may fully meet the needs of the current population. And Mwanza, like most cities in the developing world, continues to grow, increasing its population by more than 4 percent every year. Photograph A fisherman delivers his catch from Lake Vitoria, right, for weighing by the Ibanda Fish Dealers Cooperative Society. Below: A net is pulled in at the end of the day // John Briscoe, senior water adviser to the World Bank, believes sanitation and water services in developing nations can be increased substantially within the next generation. But to do so, he emphasizes, good management practices must be followed. Until recently in Mwanza, for example, half the water supplied to the city was unaccounted for: the water department spent more money supplying water than it collected in revenue. Running at a loss, the water department was unable to supply water consistently, so the cycle continued. In several Botswana cities, meanwhile, competent management ensured both a consistent water supply and a careful collection of fees for services rendered. In this way, the Botswana Water Utilities Corporation was even able to expand. Photograph On Bugando Hill, above, a water vendor fills jugs from city tanks. Left: Vendors deliver water on the city's outskirts. // Steps toward better management are already being instituted in Mwanza. The national government is improving bureaucratic efficiency by decentralizing the water and sewage authorities. Under new procedures begun in 1996, Shadrack Shoo explains, the water fees collected in Mwanza are directly allocated for maintenance and improvements instead of being routed through the national government in Dar es Salaam. "Now, if there is a breakdown, we can act fast," he says. This institutional change has given the local water department added incentive to collect fees, and as a result, revenues have more than doubled. Plans are now in place to rehabilitate the public standpipes kiosks to serve the city. The rationale is that many Mwanza residents spend a large portion of their income obtaining water from private taps or water vendors, and if the government's service becomes more reliable and accessible, these people will be able and willing to pay the lower public fees. Perhaps most important, in July 1997 Mwanza's water supply and wastewater management were finally placed under one local authority, the Mwanza Urban Water and Sewage Board, in the hope of ending the kind of fragmentation that has allowed the release of wastewater to despoil the freshwater supply. As Shadrack Shoo explains, "An effective long-term strategy is to protect the water resource at the outset, not to purify it afterward." Control of sewage is also essential if the international effort to revitalize Lake Victoria is to succeed. The massive amount of human waste currently entering the lake from Mwanza and other cities has been contributing to a reported rise in lake algae in recent years. As dead algal matter sinks to the bottom and habitats, endangering fish species unique to Lake Victoria. With funding from the World Bank, the three countries bordering the lake-Tanzania, Kenya, and Uganda-are now working together to address this environmental problem. The payoffs will be not only improved human health but the preservation and rehabilitation of the world's second largest freshwater lake. Photograph Chemicals for chlorination are stirred by attendants at the main water treatment plant, above, and at a distribution tank on Capri Point, above right. Photograph Nenes Iriya, left, a doctor at Bugando Medical Center, checks on four-month-old Mgasa Chacha. The boy was subsequently diagnosed as suffering from cholera, a bacterial infection often spread through contaminated water. Below: Nurses attempt to get an IV needle into the dehydrated infants collapsed veins. Reference Further Reading Reference "When the Cup Is Half Full: Improving Water and Sanitation Services in the Developing World," by John Briscoe (Environment, May 1993) "The Decade and Beyond: At a Glance," by J. Christmas and) Drawers of Water: Domestic Water Use in East Africa, by Gilbert E White, David J Bradley and Anne U White (University of Chicago Press, 1972) Reference "Running Just to Stay in Place: Water, Health, and the Environment," by David Kinley (Water Well Journal, Nov. 1994) //
Send your health questions to: "Ask Doctor Cory," Children's Digest, RO. Box 567, Indianapolis, IN 46206. This column does not replace your doctor's advice. Dear Dr. Cory: My mom is always saying, "Quit eating carrots. How about some broccoli or lettuce?" Can you really turn orange if you eat too many carrots? Christa Hunter New Haven, Indiana Dear Christa: Eating too many carrots (or other yellow vegetables) can cause your skin to turn yellow, a harmless condition called carotenemia (kare-uh-tehNEE-mee-uh) that comes from eating vegetables with lots of carotenoid (kareOT-n-oid) pigments. You'd have to eat twelve carrots or ten sweet potatoes every day for several weeks before this could happen. When you stopped eating the vegetables, your skin would return to normal in a few weeks. Your mother is probably trying to encourage you to eat a well-rounded diet. Carrots are very good for you because they are low in calories and fat and have lots of potassium, vitamin A, and folic acid minerals you need, you should eat other fruits and vegetables, too. Remember, at least five servings a day of fruits and vegetables is the minimum amount your body needs to work better and last longer. Dear Dr. Cory: Why do we have tonsils? Mine get swollen and red whenever I get sick. They really hurt and I can't breathe very well. My friend had this trouble and had her tonsils taken out. If you can have tonsils taken out, why do you have them in the first place? Christina Mo Danville, California Dear Christina: Tonsils are part of the lymphatic (limFAT-ik) system which helps your body fight infections. They contain white blood cells that battle infections that enter the mouth by food or by air. Tonsils help keep the infection in the throat rather than letting it spread to other parts of the body. Usually large in childhood, tonsils reach their maximum size when the person is about eight. Then they gradually shrink. Adults' tonsils are your tonsils if: you get repeated strep throat infections; you get other throat infections that don't clear up with antibiotic medicines; your tonsils stay so large that they interfere with swallowing or breathing. A word of caution: Removing tonsils does not eliminate sore throats. In the past we removed tonsils too often, thinking the child (or adult) would never get another infection. Dear Dr. Cory: What is a sinus and what is a sinus infection? Karen Pastor Staten Island, New York Dear Karen: A sinus (SY-nus) is one of several large air spaces found in the bones around your nose and eyes. You have eight sinuses-four on each side. Small openings connect each sinus to the nose for drainage. The sinuses are lined with mucous membrane which contains tiny hairs called cilia (SILL-ee-uh). The membrane makes a cleansing fluid called mucus which, with the cilia, helps wash away bacteria, dust, and other particles you inhale. The mucus also moistens the air you to lighten the weight of the bones in your skull. But they also act as vibrating chambers when you speak. If you place your hands on your face while making vowel sounds, you can feel your sinuses vibrate. When infected, the sinus lining swells and traps mucus inside your sinuses. Usually, the lining of your nose swells, too, closing off the sinus openings and adding to the drainage problem. Pus and mucus can not escape, and the sinuses become painful from inflammation and the pressure. Sinus infections can be caused by a bacterium, virus, or a fungus. Often you'll have a cold before a sinus infection develops. Allergies can also lead to sinus infections. Antibiotic medication can be prescribed for sinus infections caused by bacteria. See you next issue! Your friend, Cory SerVaas, M.D.
"Well, that just tears it!" Tom yelled as he hung up the phone. My mouth fell open. My stepfather was usually very calm and cool. It was part of what made him such a good police chief. "What happened, Tom?" I asked. "Another burglary," he said. He put on his hat and headed toward the door. "And this one's right across the street, at the Brewsters' house." The door slammed behind him. Toby was dozing under the table. But when he heard the door close, he jumped up and barked. He was just five months old, but he was already a good watchdog. "Good boy," I praised him. Mom started clearing the dinner dishes. "Poor Tom," she said. "Poor Tom" was right. This was the fourth burglary in less than two weeks. In a small town like Tylerville, that was a real crime wave. And now with a burglary right across the street from furious. "I'm going to take Toby out now and do dishes after," I told Mom as I grabbed Toby's leash. I wanted to go to the Brewsters' to investigate. // "Fine," she said. "I'm going to grade papers. Remember to put out the trash." "Right," I said as I ran out the door. Toby and I were walking up the Brewsters' driveway when Sergeant Lois Karpinski pulled up in her patrol car. "Hi, Pete," she said. "How's the new puppy?" "Great," I said as we walked up the driveway together. "Toby's really smart." "He doesn't bother your allergies?" she asked. I shook my head. "No. Westies have special hair." Lois rang the Brewsters' bell, and Mr. Brewster opened the door. We followed Mr. Brewster into the living room. "When did you first realize someone Brewster. "When I went to put away my earrings after work," she said, "I saw that my jewelry box was empty. I called Larry, and we checked the silver. It's all gone, too, plus a pair of gold goblets. They were a wedding gift from my grandmother." Mrs. Brewster burst into tears. I looked around the room for clues. That's when I saw something surprising-a tuft of dog hair lay on the floor. An alarm went off in my head. // "Tom," I blurted, "I saw someone here today. Maybe it was the burglar!" My stepfather spun around. "Pete? What are you doing here?" he demanded. "I saw someone here today," I repeated. "I was walking Toby after school, and I saw a man come around the side of the house." Tom's whole body tensed. "What did he look like?" he asked. hair," I said slowly. "He was wearing a blueand-white jogging suit, and his dog-" "His dog?" Tom interrupted. "Yeah. He had a German shepherd with him. I figured they were coming from the field out back." Tom sighed. "They probably were. Not many burglars take along the family pet." "But look!" I picked up the tuft of hair. "A dog was here. Maybe the guy used him as a lookout." "That's probably from Barkley," Mr. Brewster said. "He was here yesterday with the grandkids." "Pete, was the man you saw carrying anything?" Tom asked. I shook my head. "No." "Then he's not our man," said Tom. "Even though this guy takes only small items, he still needs a box or a bag to carry them." My ears burned with embarrassment. "Some detective I was!," he said. "If other people were as observant as you, we'd have this case solved already." I swallowed hard and nodded. "I'd better get home." I was loading the dishwasher when the first sneeze came. It was quickly followed by four or five more. I blew my nose and tried to think of what had set off my allergies. Then I saw the tuft of hair I'd found on the Brewsters' living room floor. I thought I'd dropped it, but it was stuck to my sweatshirt. I was about to throw it away when I realized that it couldn't have come from Barkley. Barkley was a poodle, another dog that was better for people with allergies. My heart started beating faster. The hair was from the burglar's dog. I just knew it. I forced myself to slow down and think things through. OK, the man I saw wasn't carrying anything, I thought. Maybe the loot, not fat. I bit my lip. Maybe .... "Pete, did you remember the garbage?" Mom called down. I groaned because, of course, I'd forgotten. "I'm on my way," I yelled. While I carried the trash to the curb, Mr. Brewster brought out his bags, too. We waved to each other. I was halfway back to the house when it hit me. I let out a WHOOP! and went running across the street. As I fumbled with the tie on one of the Brewsters' trash bags, Tom and Lois came out of the house. "Pete, what are you doing?" Tom sputtered. "It's got to be here," I said, "because the dog wasn't Barklev and the guv wasn't fat." Lois looked at me like I'd lost my mind, but Tom understood. "Get your flashlight," he told Lois. A few minutes later, while smaller plastic bag from the center of each large garbage bag. Inside the smaller bags were the missing jewelry, silver, and gold goblets. "Clever plan," said Lois. "Rob the house the day before garbage pick up, and then come back later for the goods." "Not clever enough," said Tom. "We've got him now." At breakfast the next morning, Tom filled me in on how he and Lois had caught the burglar. They had found him digging the stolen loot out of the Brewsters' trash a little after midnight. Later, at his apartment, they had found his dog and the valuables from the other burglaries. "And I couldn't have done it without you, Pete," said Tom, dropping his hat on my head. "You're one smart detective." "This is one time I'm glad I have allergies," I said. "If I hadn't started sneezing, I never would for crime," said Tom with a grin. "That's what you've got." "Just like my dad," I said, watching him from under the brim of the hat. His eyes widened and then so did his grin. "That's right, son," he said, giving my shoulder a squeeze, "just like your dad." //
// Dear Dr. Cory: I have a problem with my knee when I do physical education at school. I have a brace, but It Is too big for me because my sister wore It. I need your help. Please respond. Kelsey Schluter Topanga, California Dear Kelsey: We asked Eric Small, M.D., FAAP, an expert in pediatric/adolescent sports medicine and Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Orthopedics and Rehabilitation Medicine at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York to answer your question: "Thank you for your letter. In response to your question, you should not be wearing a knee brace that is too big for you. It sounds like you are suffering from runner's knee' or Patella Femoral Pain Syndrome. This // condition is best treated by doing straight leg raising. This should be done three times per week, three sets of ten." Regarding knee injuries in general, recent research shows that females are more prone to suffering from various knee injuries. Such knee injuries may be Patella Femoral Pain Syndrome or, ACL) of the knee. It is believed that females have looser ligaments about their knees than males do. In addition, the biomechanics of landing and performing a jump may not be as efficient in females. To help this problem, one should practice landing with the knees only mildly flexed or bent "Dear Dr. Cory: My mom has cancer. How do you get cancer? She never smoked. Jamie Poole Bly, Oregon Dear Jamie: We wish we knew all the answers to why people get cancer. There are many different kinds of cancers. Some cancers are hereditary, which just means that something in the genes that you were born with eventually causes cancer to develop. As I'm sure you know, most people who get lung cancer have been smokers or have been breathing secondhand smoke. We're glad to know that your mother never smoked, so you weren't exposed to secondhand smoke. Smoking greatly increases the chances of getting several different types of cancer. Almost a third of even people who don't smoke sometimes get cancer. Doctors and scientists are still working on the exact causes of cancer. They do know that most of the causes of cancer result from several factors. Cancer begins when normal body cells become abnormal and begin to grow uncontrollably. These cells spread and may grow into masses of tissue called tumors. Some tumors are malignant (cancerous) and will continue to grow. Some may be benign, or innocent, and stop growing. Dear Dr. Cory: Why do we get blood blisters? Kara Morris via e-mail Dear Kara: // Blood blisters are caused by trauma to the skin, such as pinching or hitting. They are regular blisters that contain blood. A small blood vessel under the top layer of the skin has broken due to the trauma and bled into the blister. Blood blisters should not be opened because that only increases the risk of infection. Usually they dry and peel away within one to two weeks. However, please see your doctor if swelling, or "red streaks." See you next Your friend, Cory SerVaas, M.D. Parents: Get your FREE Family Fun and Fitness e-newsletter each month, featuring family-health and kids' activities. Find out more and sign up at www.cbhi.org/family. Ways to Decrease the Risk of Cancer * Do not smoke or use smokeless tobacco. * Avoid heavy use of alcohol (mouth cancer, liver cancer, and other cancers are found more often in heavy drinkers). * Protect your skin from the sun. * Have your house tested for radon. * Eat a varied, well-balanced diet with at least five servings of vegetables and fruits each day. * Avoid high-fat diets, and eat fewer saltcured, smoked, and nitrite-cured foods. * Keep a normal weight, and get plenty of exercise. Sidebar Send your health questions to "Ask Doctor Cory," Children's Digest, PO. Box 567, Indianapolis, IN 46206 or e-mail us at **32;567;TOOLONG. This column does not replace your doctor's advice Green balloons, purple socks. Big yellow moon, shiny blocks. Through the windows of your eyes You see color, shape, and size. // Think of the things you can see: puppy dogs, fireworks, your favorite book or video, the friends you play with. You see all these things because of two wonderful windows in your body-your eyes. Look around. You'll see that eyes come in different colors, shapes, and sizes. The first thing you notice about eyes is their color. Look in a mirror. The colored part of your eye is a circle of muscle called the iris. Your iris may be blue, brown, green, or even violet. The darker your eyes, the more color your irises have. People in the same family often have eyes the same color. If your grandpa has big brown eyes, probably one of your parents, your aunts, uncles, or cousins has big brown eyes. // That round black opening in the middle of your iris is your pupil. Your pupil of light passes through. If you are outside in the bright sun, your pupils grow smaller to protect your inner eyes. If you are in a dark room, your pupils get bigger. Try it. Close your eyes and lightly cover them with your hands. Have a mirror ready. Count slowly to ten. Open your eyes and look quickly at your pupils. You can see them get smaller. Your eyeballs sit in bony openings in your skull. Layers of fat around the eye protect the eyeballs. Six small muscles are stretchy enough to let you move your eyes all around. The big work of your eyes goes on inside the eyeball. When light first falls on something we see, the light rays form a picture. This picture passes first through the cornea, a clear thin coating on the outside of your eye, almost like a window pane. From there, the picture goes through the pupil and onto your lens. The lens of your eye works just like the lens The lens sends the picture on through a big bunch of clear jellylike liquid with the funny name of vitreous humor. That jelly makes up the biggest part of the eye. The picture travels through the jelly and lands on the retina at the back of your eyeball. The retina sends a message to your brain: "Hey, I see something!" Next, the brain, your body's built-in computer, tells you what you see. This all happens faster than you can snap your fingers. // Protecting your eyes with sunglasses and a hat is just as important as protecting your skin with sunscreen. // But wait a minute. If your eyes are this amazing, why do some people wear glasses? People need glasses when the lenses in their eyes don't work quite right, so pictures are blurry and out of focus. The lenses in glasses help your eyes do the job they're supposed to do. Eyes are important. That's why you have eyelids, thin layers of skin and tiny specks of dirt from falling into your eyes. Every time you blink, tears wash over your eyes to keep them clean and wet. It is important to help protect your eyes from bright sunlight by wearing a hat and sunglasses. Think about your eyes the next time you see a puppy, your friend, or your favorite toy.
Dear Dr. Cory: I like to play sports.When I am done, my heels hurt so much that I can hardly walk. My mom said it is from running on hard ground. I put pads in the bottom of my shoes, but that does not help. When I bump my heels, they hurt. Why is this happening? Toby Boeckman St Henry, Ohio Dear Toby: Heel pain is frequently due to plantar fascitis (PLAN-ter fas-SY-tus). This is inflammation of the tissue that wraps around the heel and runs to the ball of the foot. It is often caused by not wearing shoes with adequate cushioning, being overweight, or standing for long periods of time. Research has found that one of the best ways to take care of such heel pain is to wear the rubber heel cups found at most athletic shoe stores. Heel cups provide the most pain relief when used along with exercises that stretch the foot arch and heel cord. If you play outdoor soccer, shoes with cleats don't provide much cushioning against the hard ground type of soccer shoe called a "turf" shoe. It provides more cushioning. If you have constant pain or swelling, you should check with your doctor. These could be signs of a sprain or fracture. When you have heel pain, put ice on the heel for ten to twenty minutes. Sometimes relief of pain comes only with rest, so you might have to cut back on your activities for a while. To Help Prevent Heel Pain: 1. Face a wall and place your hands against the wall at shoulder height. 2. Step forward with one foot, bending that knee. 3. Extend the other leg behind you, toes pointing straight ahead. 4. As you lean forward, you'll feel the stretch in the heel cord and foot arch of the extended leg. Hold the stretch for fifteen seconds. 5. Relax and repeat several times. 6. Repeat the stretches with the other leg extended. Dear Dr. Cory: I am wondering what the bellybutton is Truitt Wichita, Kansas Dear Jonelle: Your belly-button, or umbilicus, is the place where your umbilical cord was attached. Before a baby is born, it grows inside its mother's uterus. The uterus is a muscle that gets bigger as the baby gets bigger. It provides a safe, warm place for the baby to grow. While a baby is growing inside the uterus, it is connected to the mother's placenta by the umbilical cord. Through this cord, the baby receives all the food and oxygen it needs from the mother. Waste chemicals from the baby, such as carbon dioxide, pass back the other way through the cord. When the baby is born, it no longer needs the umbilical cord. It gets its food by nursing from the mother or drinking from a bottle. And the baby gets the oxygen it needs from the air. So, after birth, the baby's cord is clamped and cut. It doesn't hurt because the cord doesn't have any up and falls off, leaving just the belly button. Dear Dr. Cory: How do coughs form? Jamie Snapp Farmington, New Mexico I cough all the time. How are coughs formed? Virginia Ortiz San Diego, California Dear Jamie and Virginia: Coughing is a protective action that clears your throat and other air passages of irritating particles. Such things as dust, food, and even your own mucus can make you cough until your throat is clear. When you cough, you first take a deep breath. Then your vocal cords close, closing your windpipe. The muscles that help you breathe air out, your expiratory muscles, tighten. Suddenly your vocal cords open, shooting out the trapped air along with whatever was irritating your airway. Constant or long-lasting coughs can be due to such things as a viral or bacterial infections, asthma, allergies, something caught in the windpipe or lungs, or irritating fumes from paint or tobacco smoke. Your friend, Cory SerVaas, M.D. Sidebar Send your Child Life, PO. Box 567, Indianapolis, IN 46206. This column does not replace your doctor's advice. //
The Child Life readers who have begun the fascinating crossword puzzle trip around the world are well on their way. Nearly all the words in Puzzle No. 3 are geographical names, so don't be afraid to use your world atlas. Good Luck! Answers to appear in the next issue. ACROSS 1. Initial letters of a south Atlantic state. 3. Opposite of down. 5. Island in the Mediterranean; birthplace of Napoleon. 10. Country in northwestern Africa. 15. Another word for "uneven" or "unusual." 16. The name of a day for planting trees and shrubs. 17. To move more swiftly than to walk. 18. Initials for that region on the Atlantic coast settled by Puritans. 21. Abbreviation of "point," as it is printed on the map. 22. Letters standing for a southern state bounded by North Carolina, Georgia, and the Adantic Ocean; Charleston is an important seaport there. 23. Native of Serbia, a republic of Yugoslavia in the Balkan Mountains. 25 for Ante Meridian. 30. First note in the music scale. 31. Letters standing for the direction of southeast. 32. Initial letters standing for the smallest state in the U.S. 33. Letters standing for a group of islands south and southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, including Cuba, the Bahamas, Puerto Rico, and Jamaica. 34. Abbreviation of a New England state, bounded by Canada, New York, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts. 35. Initials standing for method of delivering mail in rural areas. 36. Abbreviation for the title "Right" sometimes used before "Honorable" and "Reverend." 38. Abbreviation of "advertisement." // 40. Large ship in which Noah and the animals took refuge during the flood. 42. Abbreviation for "county," a division of a state. 43. Initial letters of the Orkney Islands, off the coast of northern Scotland. 44. Capital and largest city of Ireland. 47. The smallest. Abbreviation of the direction of northeast. 50. Western state of U.S.; its capital is Boise. 51. The first two letters of the capital of Switzerland. 52. Ancient name of Japan, whose people are often spoken of as Nipponese. 54. The sea, part of the Mediterranean, separating Greece from Asiatic Turkey 57. Insect somewhat like a bee, which stings but does not make honey. 58. Another name for lion; also a boy's name. 60. Abbreviation for * 1tcetera. 61. Poetic word found in Shakespeare, meaning "in a little while" or "later." 63. Article used instead of "a" before words beginning with vowels. 64. A girl's name commencing with 0. 66. What the Easter rabbit did with your Easter eggs. 68. To sing wordlessly in a low tone. 70. Island in the Bay of Biscay, opposite La Rochelle, France; owned by France. 71. Abbreviation for a midwestern. Abbreviation of "ocean." DOWN 1. Letters representing Nova Scotia, a province of Canada. 2. Initial letters of Canary Islands, near Africa and owned by Spain. 3. A city and district in ancient Babylonia, ending in R 4. Largest river in Italy; it empties into the Adriatic Sea. 5. One of Massachusetts' towns; scene of the first Revolutionary battle. 6. A lyric poem of dignity and style. 7. Abbreviation for "road," as you often see it on signposts. 8. Initials standing for Central America. 9. Name of a large peninsula in southwestern Asia, between the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. 10. A river in New York state which joins the Hudson River at Albany. 11. A coordinating conjunction; a connecting word. 12. Abbreviation of "creditor." 13. A small vessel for drinking, usually made of china. 14. Smallest of the Great Lakes. 19. Abbreviation for a New Letters standing for a long, narrow island near New York and Connecticut. 22. Initials of western state of the U.S. where gold and lignite are mined in its Black Hills. 23. A small, furry mammal that can be found swimming in arctic and temperate waters. 24. Letters meaning "railroad," usually seen on crossing signs. 26. Letters standing for an island separated from Brooklyn by Upper and Lower New York Bay. 27. River in England, on the banks of which is Shakespeare's village of Stratford. 29. A title prefixed to a man's name. 37. A French colony on the northern coast of Africa, bordered on the west by Algeria. 39. Nickname of a girl named Diana. 41. What you do with Child Life. 42. Abbreviation for "company" 43. Large body of salt water; the Pacific is one, the Atlantic another. 45. Name of an Italian boy, commencing with B. 46. An odd number castle walls. 48. A nautical word, meaning "on the beam," or in line with a ship's main beam. 52. A nickname for Nancy. 53. A town in Hawaii, called Olaa. 55. Another word for "resound" or "reverberate." 56. Negative word used usually after "neither" 57. What dogs do with their tails when they are pleased and happy. 59. What you say when you are surprised. 60. Abbreviation for "editor." 62. Nickname for Edward. 65. Abbreviation of a city in northwestern Illinois on the Mississippi River; also the name of a railroad. 67. Abbreviation for the country known as the Emerald Isle; where shamrocks grow. 69. Abbreviation for Upper Canada.
Dear Dr. Cory: We have dogs. Is it all right or bad for them to eat chocolate? Hilary Burgin and Mackenzie Bartlett Acton, Massachusetts Dear Hilary and Mackenzie: There is a chemical in chocolate called theobromine. Unlike humans, dogs are unable to metabolize, or break down, this chemical in their body. Instead it acts like a poison to their system. It can cause problems to their digestive, nervous, heart, and circulatory systems.These problems can give the dog symptoms like vomiting, diarrhea, nervousness, muscle twitching, and seizures. Deaths have also been reported. Pets are like young children.They can't protect themselves from dangers. So protect your pet from anything that you think might harm him, including chocolate. Dear Dr. Cory: At night it has been hard to breathe, even when I lie down. But I didn't start having this problem until I came out to California for the summer to visit relatives. Do you think I'm homesick? // Sarah Clark Bakersfield, California Dear Sarah: Have you ever been cough and a more difficult time breathing at night. Were you around things in California that you are not normally around at home in Oklahoma, such as a cat or cigarette smoke? Sometimes these things can bring on, or trigger, an asthma attack.The air quality where you are in California may be different from your home. Air pollution can also trigger asthma attacks. If you continue to have trouble breathing at night, you need to be evaluated by your family physician. Did you know? The average 12-ounce can of soda pop contains about 40 grams of refined sugars. That's 10 teaspoons of pure calories.Would you ever eat 10 teaspoons of sugar at once? The Center for Science in the Public Interest is worried about the nutrition of all kids, and so are we. Coca-Cola is the exclusive global sponsor for the movie, "Harry Potter and the Sorceror's Stone." "In much of the world, child obesity rates have been increasing. At the same time, consumption by children exploding, while milk intake is declining" // Barry Popkins, Professor of Nutrition, University of North Carolina School of Public Health From Concerned Kids "I am disappointed that Harry Potter, which was so good for the growth of the mind, is now being used to sell a product which is not good for the growth of the body. Colas have no nutrients, and they take the place of nutritious drinks like juice or milk.They do nothing to make you stronger or healthier.Why encourage us to do something which isn't good for us?" Kaira S., age 10, competitive swimmer Providence, Rhode Island "You must agree that Harry Potter books are superb, and you do get lost in the books. So many children think so that never liked to read before. So now that J.K. Bowling is influencing them to read, she is influencing them to drink Coca-Cola, when children should be drinking milk or some more nutritive drink. Girls are more at risk than anyone else at getting osteoporosisand J.K. age 10, junior Olympian In aerobics Rehoboth, Mississippi For more information or to get involved, visit this Web site: saveharry@cspinet.org. Your friend, Cory SerVaas, M.D. Sidebar Send your health questions to: "Ask Doctor Cory," Child Life, PO. Box 567, Indianapolis, IN 46206 or e-mail Dr. Cory at **26;692;TOOLONG. This column does not replace your doctor's advice. //
// Pretend you are living 1,200 years ago in ancient Greece. You spent the day playing in the ocean. When you came home, the servant fixed a tasty meal of boiled seal and seaweed. Now it's time to brush your teeth and go to bed. Do you reach for the toothbrush and the Colgate? No way. This is 1,200 years ago, remember? You reach for the wool rag and the powdered mouse bones. And if you're out of mouse bones, you might open a new container of ashes -- from burnt rabbit fur!. That's right. Our ancestors all over the world once used amazing mixtures and odd items to brush and clean their teeth. just listen to these crazy concoctions! To whiten their teeth, the ancient Greeks also used powdered crab eyes, snails, at droppings, and iron rust. Yum! Hindu priests in India once cleaned their teeth with slivers of cherry wood. Ancient Arabs would carve sticks from a special shrub. This shrub contained much sodium bicarbonate, a natural cleanser. in many popular toothpastes. It's hard to believe that people have been cleaning their teeth with sodium-bicarbonate for 5,000 years! Those old tooth-care products certainly were interesting-but they didn't work very well. Toothaches and cavities were very common. Egyptian doctors believed that olive oil, dates, onions, and honey cured all types of mouth problems and toothaches. Many people used peppermint oil to relieve a toothache. Ancient Chinese people tried to stop the pain by inserting a live louse into the cavity. (Loused by is the singular of lice.) Some believed that cavities were caused by worms nibbling at the inside of the tooth. To fix the problem, they just yanked out the offending tooth!. It wasn't until 1728 that people believed otherwise. Pierre Fouchard proved that there were no squiggly creatures living in our pearly-whites. He is considered the father of modern dentistry. // Different herbs and spices kept our ancestors' breath sweet-smelling. Cardamom seed, anise seed, nutmeg, and mint leaves have all. Tooth care has come a long way. In America today, it begins as soon as kids have teeth. But toothpaste ingredients still have weird names: stannous fluoride, calcium pyrophosphate, and magnesium aluminum silicate. You would think that the war against tooth decay would be over by now! But listen to this: More than half the people now living in America will lose all their teeth by age sixty-five. So don't mess around-it's time to brush! And the next time you pick up your tube of minty-fresh gel toothpaste, think about your ancestors. Crab eyes, burnt rabbit fur,. powdered coral, bat droppings... You know something? Compared to that, brushing after every meal doesn't sound bad at all!
Among the limited news items in the January 1848 California Star was a heartening report by a local physician, Dr. Victor Fourgeaud. "We have one of the most healthful territories on the continent, with a climate unrivaled in purity and equability," said the enthusiastic medic. "Nor is sickness, that scourge of humanity, here to harass and hinder us in our pursuits, though some portions of Sacramento and San Joaquin are subject to bilious remittent intermittent fevers .... Wjounds heal here with astonishing rapidity, owing, it is supposed... to the extreme purity of the atmosphere." The busy physician had been asked by the newspaper editor to write a few words about the health of the small San Francisco community. He was unaware that another news item in the same edition would change his life drastically almost overnight and almost equally affect the few thousand settlers in the San Francisco Bay region. The item was short and simple, saying in effect: "John Marshall, a mill hand, has found some gold at a sawmill on the South Fork of" Perhaps Dr. Fourgeaud worried whether he had downplayed some disturbing reports he had received from front-line settlers and ranchers in the Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys, both about 100 miles inland from the Pacific Coast. A number of recurrent dreadful fevers had occurred in the valleys, and they resisted treatment. The physician had been told that many of the victims screamed with pain, complaining of severe headaches, and that many became delirious and seemingly lost their sense of reason during the height of their symptoms. There was very little in the frontier physician's textbooks to tell him how to treat such a vexing and puzzling ailment. In a few months, Dr. Fourgeaud and the few other medics in Northern California would have their quiet and peaceful way of life violently disrupted and would have little time for medical reflections. Reports of gold on the American River soon spread round the world, and the news caught the attention of thousands of adventurers anxious for a change of scene, riches, and a new way of life. numbers-at least 120,000 men, some mere boys not yet into their teens. Most were men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five; wives and children accompanied only a few. They came by covered wagon over the plains and through the great desert country of the Far West. Hundreds succumbed to malnutrition and scurvy, and many contracted cholera as they traveled when they drank contaminated milk and water. Most arrived by clipper, either coming around Cape Horn (a passage that took weeks from New England ports to San Francisco) or by vessels that sailed to the Panama Isthmus. There, passengers were told to cross through the swamps and meet ships waiting on the Pacific Coast side. The isthmus was a steaming jungle, filled with swarms of insects, some of which had never been seen before. There was no protection against them, particularly the mosquitoes. Everyone was bitten, and thousands became seriously ill with malaria or yellow fever. Just as many came down with food-borne ills, such as dysentery and cholera. These were lumped into a category called Panama Fever. Among this group was a strange recurrent fever referred to as brain fever. It was called this because victims lost their sense of reason. Within weeks hundreds of ships glutted San Francisco Harbor, discharging their human cargos, now being called "forty-niners." These travelers hurried the one hundred miles to Sacramento by wagon train, coach, or on foot, and right behind them came a concerned Dr. Fourgeaud, who knew an epidemic was coming. He had seen the countless sick, most of whom needed hospitalization. But the greed for gold pushed them on in their search for treasure. At Sacramento, Dr. Fourgeaud quickly opened an office at Fifth and J Streets and met with the physicians in town to map out a program of medical procedure. He was dismayed when worried colleagues told him that they had several cases of smallpox. He felt that the new multitudes would overwhelm the facilities of their small town along the Sacramento River. Sacramento was the point into the gold-laden hills. In 1849, there were probably fewer than 15,000 Yankees in all of Northern California. The Spanish aristocrats who owned most of the ranchlands numbered only a few hundred; the Indians could not be properly counted, but their number likely matched the influx of Americans until gold was discovered. There was also a society of padres. Most physicians in California had been recent participants in the Mexican War of 1846 and had chosen to remain in California territory when the war ended. It was a difficult journey to return to New England or other areas east of the Mississippi where most had come from. The land along the vast Pacific Coast was rich and productive. It promised a happy existence. Many medical orderlies were also discharged from the army, and they followed their medical officers into Northern California. A few began to call themselves physicians when they found that anyone could open a medical office in the Far West. Settlers took a man at his word, so no one challenged a. Many forty-niners swept into the gold regions of the Sierra Nevada foothills and discovered to their dismay that seeking gold was a tedious and often unrewarding venture. They returned to Sacramento exhausted, discouraged, and frequently ill. The forty-niners came back from the hills with a variety of mountain and valley fevers. To house them and treat them, the city of Sacramento established hospitals-then known as pest houses. However, there was much more to worry about than the treatment of the sick and their diseases. The miners had dug into thousands of streams in the hills, dislodging gravel that swept into the large Sacramento River. This raised the floor of the stream so much that each winter, destructive flooding occurred. The great and sudden flood of January 8, 1850-one of the first of the disasters-was among the worst. A huge wall of water rushed downriver and into Sacramento, drowning many who were living in tents at the time. The Sacramento City Hospital was also swept away by the flood. The survivors were from the pressure of the water. Finally, those who remained were taken to a private hospital owned by Drs. J.D. Stillman and John F. Morse. On January 11, 1850, Dr. Stillman opened his notebook and took a few moments to report what was happening to the forty-niners. "We are all, about forty of us," he wrote, "in the upper story of our hospital... a few patients muttering in delirium. A lone woman, sick and destitute, is curtained off in one corner of the room." The following day, he made another entry: "The water is still rising-at the rate of six inches an hour. Tents, houses, boxes, barrels, horses, mules, and cattle are sweeping by with the swollen torrent. I have some misgivings about our fate, but sure I am that we will not desert the sick. If we are swept away, we will go together." However, Dr. Stillman survived and went on to and numerous other doctors. During the 185Os one pioneer merchant, admiring the work done by the valiant physicians serving Northern California, wrote: "The physicians did noble work; no danger appalled them. Night and day they responded to the call of distress, scarcely pausing to snatch a few hours of needed rest and sleep. Remedies (during an early flood) were down to calomel and quinine." Dr. Fourgeaud finally realized that his dream of a quiet and restful life as a practicing physician was an impossibility because of the influx of the forty-niners. Historical records show that he was busy in practice as late as August 1863. He had, by then, already seen the city of Sacramento establish a Board of Health, one of the first in the nation. He knew that his efforts and those of other practitioners had helped encourage the building of levees to hold back annual floods. Toward the end of the Gold Rush, Dr. Fourgeaud, as he had a few years before, began to their minds. Brain fever was a mystifying disease and hard to treat. It broke out in rural areas. The victim usually developed a very high fever, muscle tremors, and then went into a coma. Dr. Fourgeaud and other medics were aware that the disease seemed more prevalent among those who handled horses, but neither he nor the other doctors could go beyond that observation. Treating victims of brain fever as best he could, Dr. Fourgeaud could not envision that the disease would, in the twentieth century, be named encephalitis. Doctors then would determine that it was spread by the bite of the mosquito, which carried the disease from infected horses and from sick wild birds. Today, of course, much is known about the once-mysterious brain fever: how to control it and how to treat it. Realizing that modern medicine still considers encephalitis a serious threat, one must express admiration for men such as Dr. Fourgeaud and his associates. They fought valiantly against disease, wounds, and the hazards of helped heal hundreds of seriously ill forty-niners and prevented the spread of plague and medical disaster. Many of the diseases they treated, such as encephalitis, remained a mystery to them, but by using their limited resources, they usually saved their patients' lives. These medics did not seek gold at a time when it seemed readily available. They sought to relieve the suffering of the forty-niners. That success was the only reward they wanted.
Once again, networks try to work ratings hocus-pocus with a slew of sleight-of-hand specials. The real trick is finding the shows that are truly enchanting. by Ken Tucker // LAST NOVEMBER'S BREAKing the Magician's Code: Magic's Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed-fronted by a pro magician wearing a hooded mask over his head-was Fox's highestrated special ever. At a time when codes of silence and honor in other quarters of society have eroded to the point of quaintness, giving away the mechanics of magic tricks must have struck millions of viewers as a harmless yet fascinating thrill. It's no wonder, therefore, that the network has scheduled another exhaustively titled sequel, Breaking the Magician's Code: Magic's Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed #2, for the end of the current sweeps period. Fox was still editing the show at press time, but I'm dubious about its value: After the first special showed us how magicians saw a woman in half, pull a rabbit out of a hat, and make a 7,000-pound elephant disappear (smoke and mirrors, my friend-literally I really want to know about this subject is how the bland Lance Burton keeps getting specials scheduled on top-rated NBC-and that's something I don't think the Fox network wants to get into. Magic pops up regularly all over TV these days-broadcast, cable, even PBS, which recently aired The Art of Magic. (Sad old PBS does its own sort of trick every season: announce a schedule and watch our audience share dwindle!) The deft, uncommonly articulate card manipulator and magic historian Ricky Jay recently hosted a fine, meticulously researched The Story of Magic on A &E.; Next week (March 10, 9-10 p.m.) The Learning Channel will offer The Secret World of Magicians and Mentalists, basically a watered-down version of the A &E; history; it concludes that "it's best to let the secrets remain secrets." In the wake of Breaking the Magician's Code, this suddenly seems both courtly and cowardly; do not expect record ratings. ABC has also gotten into the act, with ever seen was last year's David Blaine: Street Magic, in which the young, deadpan, T-shirted prestidigitator walked around the streets of New York City, stunning bystanders with cool card tricks and by levitating off the ground; the show attracted a lot of press and got solid numbers. By contrast, ABC put on Penn &; Teller's Home Invasion Magic in November and lost ratings big time. P &T; are crassly funny on their hit-and-run talk-show appearances, but as the hosts of a full hour, they come off as grumpy and condescending. Photograph TEASING TRICKSTERS: Clockwise from top left, Penn &; Teller, Jay, Elaine, and Roy, Celd // Which leads me to reveal the best-kept secret about magicians that I've figured out: They're all, to one degree or another, pretty obnoxious. Sometimes it's a matter of just being too oily slick, as in the case of David Copperfield or the veteran Vegas mutants Siegfried and Roy. Sometimes it's a question of smugness think about it, it was really the way David Blaine's special was shot and edited-in a rough, semidocumentary, spontaneous style-that made it so compelling. Blaine himself came off like such a sullen twit, it didn't surprise me to read that his gal pal is another sullen twit with talent, Fiona Apple. And even the immensely talented Jay is a bit of a self-satisfied windbag. What is it about their art that makes so many of its practitioners kinda unlikable? Is it because magic tends to attract shy nerds who must turn themselves into bravado-inflated showmen to go on stage? It makes you wonder whether Harry Houdini was also really, really cranky while trying to wriggle out of those handcuffs and straitjackets. NBC has just announced that it's in production with a little something called The World's Most Dangerous Magic, in which we'll see tricks that, says the press release, people "have died performing." Few other details were forthcoming, but here's one possibility: Penn &; goof, the blade slices through, and we discover that when separated, she's actually half Joni Mitchell, half Sylvia Plath. Looking on, David Blaine has a heart attack. Oooh, dangerous.
Few stars or wars, but in twee comedies like Waking Ned Devine, there Headnote are oddballs to rival a Tatooine cantina. Photograph SOCKS APPEAL Devine schemers Kelly (right) and lan Bannen // IT MAY TAKE A VILLAGE TO raise a child, but in the movies, village folk band together for projects that are usually much less noble. Consider, for example, the Irish comedy Waking Ned Devine. The residents of tiny Tully More learn that their dead friend Ned has won the national lottery-and decide to claim the 6.9 million jackpot by allowing Michael O'Sullivan (David Kelly) to impersonate the dead man. Can they fool the Dublin yuppie who comes to debrief Devine? That's practically a rhetor ical question, given what a staple the bumpkins-outwit -- city-slickers film has become. You might even call it a mini-genre: the community caper. Here's how old the idea is: The delightful Ealing Studios confection Whisky Galore (also known as Tight Little Island, 1949, Thorn EMI, unrated, B &W,; for rental only) rendered it with impeccably the fisherfolk of a minuscule Scottish island, starved for booze owing to WWII rationing, rejoice to find foundering just off their shores a ship carrying 50,000 cases of whiskey-but can they get around Captain Waggett (Basil Radford)? Their clever evasions (one man fills his hot-water bottle with hooch; women hide the whiskey under babies in their cradles) and straight faces make the deceit that much more delicious. Meanwhile, director Alexander Mackendrick (Sweet Smell of Success) deftly interweaves a couple of amusing romantic subplots (keep an eye out for a gorgeously youthful Gordon Jackson-later Upstairs, Downstairs' Hudson the butler-as a shy swain cowed by his flinty mother). It was a third of a century before anyone matched Whisky's panache. Writer-director Bill Forsyth's Local Hero (1983, Warner, PG, $14.95) follows American oil exec Mac (Peter Riegert) as he negotiates his company's bigbucks purchase of a tiny Scottish hamlet. To get the maximum price, the villagers bargain collectively. In the end, friends with him. Though Forsyth includes potentially overwacky elements-Mac's astronomy-crazed boss (Burt Lancaster), a sexy oceanographer who may be a mermaid-he handles the characters with humane delicacy. In Christopher Monger's The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain (1995, Miramax, PG, $9.99), the burg is in Wales, and the out-of-towners are two cartographers (Hugh Grant and Ian McNeice) who've come to measure the local landscape. When it turns out the town's hill is 16 feet too short to qualify as a mounta.in (and a place on the map), the inhabitants scheme to waylay the pair until they can add a mound up top. Grant's titular Englishman falls in love with a local girl (Tara Fitzgerald) as the villagers trudge up the hill with their buckets of dirt, but the outcome is never in doubt (look at the title). Monger fills the time with such obvious devices as a shell-shocked former soldier surmounting his fear, and Jones, the writer-director of Waking Ned Devine, keeps the sentimentality quotient low in Tully More, conveying the respectful fondness these folks feel for each other and the fun they get from their shenanigans. A mischievous spark shines from these Irish eyes, but Jones can't help exploiting the characters' eccentricities for laughs, so before long we're watching Kelly's naked old man riding a motorbike. If Jones had refrained from such easy guffaws, he could have made a truly Devine comedy. Whisky: A- Hero: A -- Mountain: C- Devine: B Photograph IN THE BONNY BOONIES Grant (left), McNeice drive Hill; Lancaster goes Local //
A post-sidekick Conan O'Brien adjusts admirably, while his prickly predecessor, David Letterman, sharpens his shtick. by Ken Tucker // SO FAR, CHRIS ROCK HAS come up with the best idea yet for an Andy Richter replacement on Late Night With Conan O'Brien. Visiting the show last month, Rock told the pale, string-bean host that he needed "a big fat black woman sittin' here," gesturing to Richter's empty courtjester perch-someone, Rock said, who'd admonish any rude guests with "Don't you talk to my Conan like that!" This was an excellent suggestion, since, despite the fact that O'Brien's show has been on for seven years now, he still behaves as if he could use some mothering-some gentle scolding when he uses the word cool too many times to refer to his guest lineup, or a prim dressing-down after hauling out the beautifully pointless, appalling, and hilarious Masturbating Bear. I've been watching O'Brien assiduously since Richter's May departure and can report that the oatmeal-skinned Irishman is doing just dandy. He's forthrightly out of the audience for a spontaneous tryout. He and his writers certainly prepare the best postmonologue sketches these days; a recent "If They Mated" segment including a morphedphoto speculation on the baby Calista Flockhart and Garry Shandling might have was thrillingly grotesque, and the introduction of a crooning R &B; couple clearly modeled on Ashford &; Simpson, who appear occasionally to sing about current events, is positively inspired. Good as Conan is, however, he's still a stripling in the talkshow family tree when compared with that giant oak of a man, the Paul Bunyan of bypasses, David Letterman. One aspect of Letterman's almightiness is that he makes a virtue of that pitfall for every longrunning TV show: repetition. Beyond the nightly Top Ten lists (which audiences still love but which clearly bore the host), Letterman loves finding some silly phrase, pet peeve, or unrehearsed embarrassment caught on tape that he can refer to or play over and over. Letterman is like a funk bassist, repeating Papa's got a recyclable bag. Thus the jag he was on for a while about what a "rip-of" the Internet is ("It took me six hours to get the weather in Milwaukee!"). And thus the endless replaying and mythologizing of that moment on June 16 when a dog accidentally bit Dave's face during Stupid Pet Tricks; 10 days after the glancing scratch, Letterman had inflated it into an attack by a "wild dingo" and was still getting fresh comic nourishment out of it. While O'Brien, Jay Leno, Craig Kilborn, Jon Stewart, and Bill Maher have all settled on the tame political stereotypes they'll joke about -- Bush is a dumb party animal; Gore is a stiff-Letterman is the only late-night host to suggest something a little more substantive: that Bush is a dangerous dumb party animal; that Gore is a worthless stiff. Letterman has been relentless in his contempt for Bush's aggressive use of the death penalty ("It was so hot in"; fake commercial: "Vote Bush: hell give ya a ride on Of Sparky"). Conan seems to steer clear of political guests (just having author Tom Clancy on recently, during which the pulp patriot made a pitch for the National Rifle Association, left O'Brien looking as if he needed a sidekick mommy to soothe his willies afterward). Letterman, by contrast, loves to spread absurd rumors, insisting that Joe Lieberman "had a brief, stormy marriage to Melanie Griffith," and he's invited Gore and Bush on his show for a debate. Gore has accepted; as I write this, Bush hasn't yet, and he's being heckled almost nightly for his reticence. Gee, I can't imagine why the man whom the invitee described as being "as dumb as a box of tools" would be hesitant. Late Night With Conan O'Brien: B+ Late Show With David Letterman: A
Rude, crude, and over-the-top, I Get Wet is roaring rocker Andrew W.K.'s idea of fun. The more restrained David Browne agrees. Photograph Andrew W.K. I GET WET ISLAND // THERE ARE ROCK STARS and then there are rock stars-excessive, largerthan-your-life personalities who transcend being mere musicians and singers. With unrelenting zeal, Andrew W.K. is determined to be the latter. From the outset, his debut album, I Get Wet, risks offending parents and Wal-Mart managers alike: The intentionally flinch -- provoking cover portrait depicts a stream of blood gushing out of his nose and down his throat. (The result of a brawl? A cocaine binge? You decide.) Three of the songs have the word party in the title, the first time that's occurred since the members of Poison, Quiet Riot, and Dokken had all their original hair. And by a bash, W.K. isn't talking light beer and finger sandwiches: One cut is called "Party Til You Puke." Other than offending retailers worldwide with that cover, W.K. (an prefer to think it stands for Want Kicks) is on a musical mission as well. He wants to rescue rock from its current mental doldrums by reclaiming its original role: as rambunctious youth-rebel music for cheerfully smashing things up, and I Get Wet is his exuberant manifesto. To accomplish that, W.K. ditches rap-metal and secondhand grunge-which constitute rock in 2002-in favor of oldfashioned pomp and bombast. His album is an unapologetic barrage of WWF-ready headbangers filtered through hedonistic hair metal. The sonics are huge and bleary-eyed, a full -- frontal assault of mosh-pit guitars, Hades-amusement-park keyboards, and reach-for-thesky hooks worthy of the combative side of Elton John. Each chorus is a football-game shout delivered at full mob-rules throttle, built around slogans like "Party! Party! There's gon na be a party tonight!" and "Let's get a party going! /When it's time to party we will always party hard!" and "You better get ready to die! You better get ready to kill!" () You want subtlety? Go elsewhere. The time-honored "na na na" chant is hauled out for one track, and it's all too easy to imagine "Fun Night" being appropriated by AnheuserBusch and retitled "Bud Night" for a future ad campaign. Even the album's lone love song, "She Is Beautiful," is little more than a burly scream: to wit, "She is beautiful! She is beautiful! The girl is beautiful!" In the great tradition of the Ramones, whose knowing dumb-fun anthems are echoed here, every track sounds nearly identical and rarely extends past the three-minute mark. Wherever he is, Joey Ramone must at least be tapping his foot along and smiling. W.K. must know how ridiculous this all sounds, but he attacks the material with such fervor that you almost believe he means every word. With his hoarse, grainy voice, he sounds like the guy at the local garage who by night sings lead in a Motorhead cover band. it, which makes sense given he's originally from Detroit (and for a while relocated to New York, hence his rousing "I Love NYC," which should scare the smarts out of Randy Newman's "I Love L.A."). For all the borderline rage that emerges from bellicose war chants like "Ready to Die," he's capable of writing "Got to Do It," an empowerment theme for those who like to sip their beer from cans mounted on their baseball caps. At any other point in time, I Get Wet would be laughable in its overblown silliness, an approach so ham-fisted it could feed several families on Easter Sunday. But you have to admire W.K. for extolling such twisted kicks. If I hear one more downtrodden Staind descendant, W.K. won't be the only one puking. I'm not sure the solution is music that marks the advent of secondgeneration '80s power metal, but it's a start. What remains to be seen is whether Get Wet garnered much ink and respectable sales when it was released in the U.K. last fall. Whether anyone in America takes W.K. up on his wild-ride offer will be a telling sign. B+
It's a brave news world, and The Daily Show takes no political-humor prisoners. Mon. -Thurs., 11 p.m. (Comedy Central) Among comedians, Jon Stewart is that rare thing: a humanist. Having moved with unusual ease from stand-up spritzer to social satirist, he trusts in the basic decency and intelligence of ordinary people. He's not alienated from the majority, the way Bill Maher is; nor is he at heart a nihilist like late-night staple Sarah Silverman, who devastates audiences with jokes about rape, AIDS, and the Holocaust. Presiding over The Daily Show With Jon Stewart, he interviews celebrities, but Stewart is not jolly like Leno or wary like Letterman, nor does he play the wily oaf, as Jimmy Kimmel does. Even though Stewart is, as he frequently points out, on the short side, he carries himself like a broad-shouldered athlete-a team player, suited up (in jacket and tie for the show, in white T-shirt and V-necked sweater when guesting elsewhere) for jovial combat. Stewart's favorite expression is the and outrage commingled. And nothing baffles or outrages him more right now than the way his government is behaving. It's not just the manner in which the White House has conducted the war in Iraq: Heaven knows he found so many instances of weasel wording ("the coalition of the willing," or what everyone else calls England and Spain") and official haughtiness (describing Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld as "the forward soldier in the Pentagon's "'gloat offensive'") that he was able to compile a recent half-hour special on The Daily Show's coverage of the war alone. Stewart and his writers have also been acutely attuned to the way war making and patriotism have been coarsely intertwined. When he coined a phrase for a bombed-out Baghdad crater-" or, as the coalition forces call it, 'a freedom hole'" - the euphemism could easily have been an actual term used by the Bush administration or the Fox News Channel. Stewart is also bracingly merciless when fearful of providing party opposition (Joe Lieberman is tagged "the candidate for people who want to vote for Bush but don't think Bush is Jewish enough"). The Daily Show is so convinced that the Dems don't have a chance in the upcoming election, they're bannering their coverage of the minority party as "The Race From the White House." In all this, the host is ably backed by a team of correspondents "whose manner and gestures," to quote from a Comedy Central press release that itself reads like something written by a Daily Show staffer, "approximate those of real newspeople." Foremost among them are Steve Carell, adept at rabbity officiousness and currently stealing laughs from Jim Carrey in Bruce Almighty, and Stephen Colbert, a master at replicating the grim sternness of government officials and TV commentators. In the Iraq special, Colbert posited the idea that in order to have prevented the war, Saddam Hussein would have needed weapons of mass destruction to destroy his denied's deadline. Praised throughout the media because he says what so many in the media can not, Stewart himself seems beguilingly resistant to flattery. When he recently appeared on Charlie Rose, Stewart sheepishly demurred when Rose-the opposite of Stewart, a French-cuff courtier of power-declared, "This is your moment: You are the guy!" (This was Charlie unscrewing a more down-market tub of the verbal table wax he uses to buff the burnished egos of, say, Henry Kissinger or Mort Zuckerman.) Stewart was having none of it, however; his reflexive self-deflation inspired one of the few truly startling things anyone has said about New York Times serial deceiver Jayson Blair: "As a fake anchorman of a fake news show... I, for one, am proud to see our commitment to journalistic falsehood catching on." Interestingly, The Daily Show is at its weakest when satirizing show business. It's as if Stewart and his staff, consumed like good Manhattanites with front-page news and a lingering raised consciousness interest in Left Coast absurdity. Thus bits like Colbert's report on Hollywood racism (the joke: Whites are being forced to imitate blacks in movies like Bringing Down the House) are frequently too on the nose to be funny. The best moments of The Daily Show are Stewart's slanted asides, frequently delivered over a previous punchline, as when he tossed out the corrosive intro "For a curmudgeonly wretch who's suffered four heart attacks and lacks any capacity for joy, Dick Cheney is riding high ...." Okay, so maybe "humanist" is a little too highfalutin and generous a praise for such a casually savage swipe. But, man, did I laugh. A-
At 12:46 A.M. last March 20, seventy-four meters beneath the icy surface of the Arctic Ocean -- and in spite of the high-tech monitoring equipment each carried -- a pair of submarines, one American, one Russian, collided. They were 105 nautical miles off the Kola Peninsula -- by some measures the most heavily militarized region in the world -- engaged in the kind of Cold War cat-and-mouse game that most people think has been consigned to history. On that morning an American nuclear-powered attack sub, the U.S.S. Grayling, was shadowing a Russian Delta-class sub out on a routine patrol. (Such Russian subs are normally equipped with sixteen ocean-spanning nuclear-tipped missiles. Under the terms of START I the number of nuclear warheads they can carry is limited -- but that agreement has not yet officially gone into effect.) That the Americans were tailing the "enemy" was routine too. Though tough economic times have forced the Russians to cut back on the amount of time their submarines spend at sea, when they do go out U.S. attack subs are sure to follow. Under subs with the intention of torpedoing them if war breaks out. The accident occurred as the Russian boat crossed in front of the American. If the U.S. submarine had been five seconds slower, the Russian sub would have been struck right on its missile bay; the bump could conceivably have opened a crack where the missiles were stored, sinking the sub and scattering nuclear warheads over the ocean floor. After the collision the roughly half-a-billion-dollar American submarine -- which according to the Pentagon sustained "slight" damage -- circled to see if the Russian vessel was seriously damaged. A later report by the Russian Navy claimed that its sub sustained a "small dent." "But thirteen-thousand-ton submarines don't just go bump in the night," says Joshua Handler, a research coordinator for Greenpeace who has advised the Reagan, Bush, and Clinton Administrations on Arctic nuclear and military matters. This accident came just fourteen months after a Russian sub in the Barents Sea surfaced underneath the American submarine Baron Rouge, severely damaging both Boris Yeltsin brought up with President Bill Clinton at their Vancouver summit. Clinton apologized and promised to look into the matter, calling it "a regrettable thing" and saying "I don't want it to ever happen again." The President assured Yeltsin that he would order a review of the collision and would open talks with the Russians "to discuss whether the policy should be changed and where we should go from here." In his post-summit statement Yeltsin brought the matter up again. By mentioning the submarine collision as one of the few irritants standing in the way of smoother U.S.-Russian relations, Yeltsin elevated the accident to a new level of importance in Washington. "Assuredly the White House boxed the ears of the Navy to make sure this kind of thing doesn't continue," says William Arkin, the director of military research for Greenpeace. "I promise you reviews are going on right now, at several levels, asking the question "'Why are we up there?'" For and Moscow has been that the superpowers were aligning, and thus nuclear threats were diminishing. Deals were struck to disassemble what remained of the arsenals of destruction built up over the previous fifty years. Today, however, the Arctic -- long home to myriad missile silos, prowling nuclear submarines, and sophisticated radar and communications systems -- is far from being disarmed. Though military spending and deployment are hot topics in both countries, the relatively empty Arctic (its population is just 10 million, at least three quarters of them Russian) continues to harbor American and Russian nuclear submarines and bombers equipped with long-range cruise missiles. Neither country has retargeted its Arctic ICBMs away from their Cold War positionings. The frozen lands and sea above the Arctic Circle are the last potential battlefront of the Cold War. Sixty percent of Russia's submarine-based strategic nuclear forces are in the vicinity of the Kola Peninsula, and the Pentagon worries that a decreased Russian submarine presence along the eastern coast of the United States may imply a higher density Pact, Soviet bombers were moved from Hungary to northern bases; Russian Bear bombers, some of them capable of carrying terrain-hugging cruise missiles, still occasionally test the northern radar defenses and are challenged by either U.S. or Canadian fighters. Russia's only remaining nuclear test site is in the Arctic, on Novaya Zemlya. Two winters ago many Russian ships steamed out of the Black Sea and joined the northern fleet. The heavily armored divisions protecting the old Soviet northern flank have not withdrawn -- in contrast to the Russian troops that were in Central Europe. Though Defense Department appropriations continue to dwindle, so far no one from the new Administration has ordered the U.S. military to curtail or alter its activities in the Arctic. The Pentagon maintains both air and sea operations there, from a variety of bases in the northern tier of the United States. In cooperation with the Canadians, it also helped construct the North Warning System, the $2.5 billion defense project that included upgrading radar installations and building more airfields in northern Canada Second World War. The barren, sparsely populated region became strategically important as first the United States and then the Soviet Union developed strategic bombers capable of delivering nuclear weapons overseas. Soviet bomber attack routes were plotted across the North Pole, and the United States responded by building a string of high-tech radar stations in the Arctic. Soon the U.S. and Canadian militaries had established a major economic, environmental, and technological presence up north. As ICBMs replaced bombers as the primary nuclear threat in the early 1960s, visions of the Arctic as a strategic battleground began to fade. In the late 1970s developments in long-range air-and sea-launched cruise missiles and submarine warfare once again fixed attention on the Arctic as an arena of potential superpower confrontation. The region's frequently ice-covered waters provided good shelter for ballistic-missile submarines, whose primary concern was to avoid detection. In the 1980s the Arctic seas became the foremost operational arena for the nuclear-powered attack submarines of both sides. Throughout the eighties the dominant Navy strategy in the Arctic was the so-called of war in Europe the Navy would launch a sizable attack on the Soviet Union's Arctic bases and weaponry. The goal was to relieve the pressure on any main front in Central Europe by opening up a new front in the north, diverting both manpower and weapons. American military thinkers felt that the United States couldn't compete man for man against the Soviets in a land-based war in Europe. Their counteroffensive was intended to destroy the Soviets' valuable collection of 100-plus nuclear submarines in port or on the prowl in the Arctic. Partly as a defense against the maritime strategy the Soviets employed what they called a bastion concept. This meant they kept their subs within small areas that they covered with surface ships and airplanes, to keep American forces at a distance. The subs at sea remained under the Arctic ice, where they were difficult to track. Since the collapse of the Warsaw Pact such strategies would seem to be obsolete or at least unnecessary. But officially, few changes in Arctic strategy or policy is that neither country will change until the military hierarchy does. "Yet it's dramatic how much has changed in the last two or three years," Josh Handler says. "In the early to mid-eighties we had a whole slew of incidents in the Arctic: intercepts, big exercises off Kamchatka, lots of literature referring to the Arctic as "the strategic frontier." That's all dropped off the map. Sure, the man on the street will be surprised that subs are still prowling and warning systems are being retrofitted. But it's essentially on autopilot up there." Oran Young, the director of the Institute of Arctic Studies at Dartmouth College, believes that the Arctic will remain an attractive area for maintaining a limited military force as a deterrent. "You have to remember that policy in the Arctic is motivated by a lot of factors other than the larger strategic balance," he says. "There are a lot of players, with a lot of interests, who have major stakes in deployment patterns, ranging from protecting civilian jobs to members of the military in both countries desperately trying to carve out new reasons to justify their existence." Some observers would argue that the Arctic remains important for one reason and one reason only: nobody owns it. Antarctica has been governed for more than thirty years by international treaty, and so the oceans north of the zones under the jurisdiction of the various Arctic countries are one of the least regulated places on earth. Even outer space is more heavily regulated. In recent years Soviet and American leaders, most notably the former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, have talked about reducing the armed presence in the Arctic. Speaking in Murmansk in 1987, Gorbachev set forth ways he felt the two nations might cooperate and asserted the Soviet Union's "profound and certain interest in preventing the North of the planet, its polar and subpolar regions, and all Northern countries from ever again becoming an arena of war." His so-called zone-of-peace initiative called for development, coordinated scientific research, environmental cooperation, and the opening of the northern sea route (which runs along the Arctic coast of Russia from Murmansk to the Bering Strait) to foreign ships. But there remains, as then Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov put it, a "lack of trust that has built up in a region so sensitive from the viewpoint of security interests" such that the cooperation Gorbachev envisioned is difficult to achieve. A key to any change is the future of the Russian military. In the late 1980s more than four million Soviet soldiers were stationed at home and abroad, supported by thousands of planes, four naval fleets, and the world's largest fleet of submarines. In addition, 1,400 land-based intercontinental missiles tipped with nuclear warheads were in position for firing. When the Soviet Union collapsed, Russia inherited most of the state's military. Only about 2.2 million Russians are officially still in uniform, and money shortages have brought most naval vessels close to home ports and grounded much eliminate entirely its armed forces in the north, but it does not know how many troops to keep. One big problem is a housing shortage, which already affects the 1.2 million military-related civilians and soldiers living north of the Arctic Circle. Grave concern persists in nearby Finland and Norway that destitute soldiers could overrun the border and loot local stores. One reason U.S. officials give for supporting the status quo in the Arctic is the still unsettled relationship between Russia and Ukraine. Despite a tentative agreement under which Ukraine will turn over its nuclear warheads to Russia in exchange for the uranium extracted from them, and its share of the Black Sea fleet in exchange for debt relief, there remains concern that a nuclear threat still exists in the former Soviet states. When Senator Sam Nunn, of Georgia, returned last winter from a tour of Soviet military bases, he cautioned that the "risk of accident or unauthorized launch of nuclear weapons has increased as instability has increased." Stephen Cohen, the director of Russian studies is greater than ever before. "That's one reason the Navy continues to monitor the location and movement of Russian subs loaded with nuclear missiles. The reality is probably that now no more than one Russian strategic ballistic missile sub is at sea at a time, whereas two, three, or four American attack subs are constantly on the prowl in the Arctic. The disparity has to do with maintenance, or the lack of it. Keeping nuclear submarines afloat is very expensive. With budgets cut to a minimum, the Russian subs are simply not in good enough shape to be at sea. Pentagon officials will say little about when submarine tailings and bomber flyovers might stop. "No" is all Defense Department officials will say as to whether an end is in sight. In regard to whether or not such games might cease, an anonymous Defense Department official told the Associated Press last spring, "It's something that we've never historically addressed." And although Defense Secretary Les Aspin said in change in its submarine operations in order to avoid future collisions, no one in the Defense Department will say what this change means, or whether the tailings have stopped. Nor will Pentagon spokesmen detail deployments or any alterations in Navy strategy that may be in effect in the Arctic. As part of its first move to shrink the military, the Clinton Administration did propose a reduction in the number of nuclear attack submarines from more than eighty to forty-five or fifty by the year 2000. And right now all branches of the military are experiencing tremendous ferment as competing factions develop new collections of war-room scenarios in order to justify their very existence. But how can the Navy rationalize a submarine force of even forty (now to be supplemented by new Seawolf submarines costing in the billions of dollars), given the condition of the Russian fleet? "What the Navy is trying to do right now," says Bill Arkin, of Greenpeace, "is stay very, very quiet. Nothing is going to change unless unfortunately for the Navy, Yeltsin brought this issue to his attention. I know the Joint Chiefs worked very quickly to respond to the President's desires after that-first by restricting naval operations in the Barents Sea, and second by beginning a review of the entire issue of naval activities in the Arctic. In an already strained relationship with the White House they don't want to give it ammunition with which to seek vengeance in the form of reducing their budget even more." In 1991 Canada and the United States reinvested in the early-warning system they had set up back in the 1950s. Today from a necklace of sites making up the just-completed North Warning System a shiny new long-range radar network ceaselessly scans the skies for friend or foe. The NWS replaces the antiquated Distant Early Warning, or DEW, line, in monitoring the roughly 5,000-mile span from Alaska to islands off the coast of Greenland. The new system has fifteen long-range radar positions that can "see" 200 miles out. Eleven are in Canada. of seventy miles. In addition, 400 people are spread out in stations along Canada's huge northern frontier, an area of land and water bigger than Europe, watching for the opening salvo of Armageddon. Is such surveillance still necessary? A supervisor at one of the new radar stations in the Northwest Territories told a reporter for The New York Times, "Just because there are fewer burglaries in the neighborhood doesn't mean you throw away the burglar alarms." One consequence of the continued military presence in the Arctic is a worsening of environmental problems. The Soviets have admitted dumping into Arctic waters since 1965 eighteen nuclear reactors, six of them laden with radioactive fuel, from submarines and an icebreaker. Most of the reactors were dumped off the coast of Novaya Zemlya, turning a site near northern fisheries into the world's largest known nuclear dump. (Over the past thirty years the U.S. Navy has lost two nuclear subs -- the Thresher and the Scorpion -- and has admitted to dumping one reactor, monitoring, and cleanup off the Siberian coast are difficult, because of the military presence, the climatic conditions, the remoteness, and the shifting interplay between land and sea-ice. International agreements for mopping up oil spills and resolving conflicts over water and air pollution do exist among the Arctic states, but these agreements are not comprehensive and have yet to be proved effective. Of great concern to environmentalists now are the hundred or so of Russia's older nuclear submarines that are already decommissioned, and the fifty or sixty due soon to be taken out of commission. "All of those reactors that have been dumped came from submarines that had accidents," says Josh Handler, who was integral to an effort to encourage the Soviet scientists who were aware of the dumping to come forward with their evidence. "They simply didn't know what to do with them: they didn't have any land-based storage sites, they couldn't get the fuel out of them, they couldn't repair them-so they filled up a now is, that may be the future of the decommissioned submarines. They have a backlog of about a hundred nuclear submarines that have been taken out of service, and they still don't know what to do with them. Greenpeace received a letter from the Russian navy last October, responding to our request to go to the Kara Sea, in which they said they did not have plans to scuttle these submarines. But that's all we have to go on." When a Greenpeace ship tried to enter the area on October 12 of last year to confirm the earlier dumpings, it was fired upon and seized by the Russian military. Twelve days later President Yeltsin ordered an investigation that eventually confirmed Greenpeace's suspicions. Right now cooperative agendas for the Arctic are in short supply, largely because no state has developed a coherent Arctic policy or a process for making crucial decisions. And, since policy efforts by either the United States or Russia provoke opposition or skepticism from the other, neither Washington nor remain: How do we reduce the military presence in the region? How do we codify reductions in arms? How could we make the Arctic nuclear-free? Would that include nuclear weapons as well as nuclear-powered ships and submarines? Oran Young believes that maintaining some military presence in the Arctic is reasonable. "It's very easy to imagine a situation where both sides have a modest number of nuclear weapons in the Arctic as a kind of residual deterrent force," he says. Josh Handler, however, disagrees: "We say, get all of the nukes out of there." Canada (which has long disliked that Arctic patrols often take place in its waters without its acknowledgment or approval) and the Scandinavian countries are very concerned about the future of all militaries in the North. The Scandinavians may have the most cause for concern, given the large number of troops stationed just across their borders and the large amount of radioactive waste that was dumped in their fishing waters. Last January, when Russia Denmark formed the Council of the Euro-Arctic Region, officials from the member countries called for better monitoring of radiation, improvement in nuclear safety, and a cleanup of areas contaminated by radiation and other pollution. As for the United States, its future north of the Arctic Circle is anybody's guess. "I'd like to think that somebody is off pondering or reconsidering American military policy in the Arctic," says John Kroll, a professor at Dartmouth College who specializes in trade and arms agreements and the Arctic, "but I get different stories about whether the Navy is even bothering. It may take the budget to drive everyone to reconsideration."
The official government measures of unemployment and poverty disguise the fact that millions of Americans can't make a decent living // TRIUMPHAL view dominates coverage of the longest peacetime recovery in U. S. history. The numbers tell the story: the lowest yearly unemployment in a quarter century, rising profits, a budget in balance, low interest rates, even lower inflation, and declining numbers of Americans classified as poor. All this is cause for rational exuberance. Allen Sinai, a noted economic analyst, has likened the times to a "worker heaven." But just as the buoyant Reagan economy of the 1980s masked seas of red ink, so the booming Clinton economy of the 1990s masks bad news. Relying on dubious measures that tell us good news, we have ignored the deepening erosion of the American Dream. On the first Friday of every month the federal government announces the unemployment rate-lately to much fanfare. A low rate signifies that American workers are able to take care of themselves, and that labor markets are tight and strong-or so it is generally presumed. objective of employment is to earn a living. One's work is instrumental in achieving independence, self-sufficiency, and what some call competency. To the Founders, independence and competency meant that a person was able to earn a decent living through work. James Madison said that the happiest and most secure society was that in which the most citizens were independent. No republic could remain untroubled, he believed, if large numbers of citizens were economically marginalized. The self-evident truth that Thomas Jefferson proclaimed in his draft of the Declaration of Independence was that "all men are created equal and independent." The principle of basic equality realized through economic independence inspired the Homestead Act. Enacted in 1862, it provided an opportunity for independence through grants of land sufficient to sustain a family to all who were willing to settle and work the land. Eighty-six years earlier Jefferson had proposed that the government of Virginia grant fifty acres of publicly owned land to any propertyless citizen willing to farm it. That everyone who is willing to is the American Dream. The state of the American Dream, however, eludes measurement by official statistics that count workers as employed if they hold any job-whether it is ten or forty hours a week; temporary, seasonal, or permanent; paying $7.00 or $70 an hour. In 1996 just over four million workers who were employed part-time said that they wanted to work full-time but could not find full-time jobs. Nearly 10 million worked fulltime year-round but for less than $7.00 an hour. These two groups of workers, all of them counted as employed, amount to twice the seven million workers who held no job and were classified as unemployed. Together they total 21 million workers, not seven million. Economists treat the unemployment rate as an indicator of aggregate pressure on the economy. But if many workers are underemployed, low unemployment does not signify a strong labor market that is likely to force up wages and hence generate inflation. That workers take and keep jobs paying menial wages is generally a mark of an for the wages of the average American worker? From 1992 to 1998 the unemployment rate dropped by more than a third, yet the real hourly compensation of American workers remained virtually unchanged. Far from threatening to ignite inflation, workers' real wage increases have failed even to keep up with improvements in their productivity. Indeed, since 1973 the hourly compensation of workers would have to have grown by 24 percent more than it has (amounting to an increase in wages for the average full-time worker of more than $6,000 a year) just to match the gains that have taken place in worker productivity. Opinion surveys asked a sample of Americans to estimate the rate of unemployment in 1996, when it stood at about 5.3 percent-close to what many economists consider to be "full employment." The respondents "answers put the unemployment rate at about 20 percent, adding to concern among economists about the sorry state of public awareness about the economy. But perhaps the public was thinking of employment as the ability to be independent estimate of 20 percent of Americans without employment more accurately captured the real picture. The unemployment rate is not the only gravely misleading statistic. Above the official poverty line, astonishingly, lie nearly half of all poor American families. Historically, the poverty line established the household income required to afford basic necessities by contemporary norms. It was never intended to identify an income sufficient simply to stay alive. As a result the first federal poverty line was tied to the spending of the average American family, starting with the proportion of the family budget spent on food. In 1955, the year that was used as a basis for the first calculation, the average American family spent about a third of its budget on food-whereas low-income families spent half or more. The formulation of the poverty line incorporated the smallest amount of money that a household would need to spend on food in order to provide adequate nutrition. This became known as the thrifty food budget. The government multiplied it by approximately three in order to arrive for a family of four would have been about $2,700 a year. In 1964, when the government first officially reported the poverty line, it was adjusted, for a rise in food prices, to a bit under $3,200. It has been adjusted for inflation each year since. Adjusting only for inflation, however, moored the poverty line thereafter to what households could afford on a 1955 budget. For example, the poverty line in 1994 (about $15,100 for a family of four) amounted, simply, to the number of 1994 dollars necessary to achieve the same material standard that $2,700 achieved in 1955. The problem with this standard is no quibble. Many of the expenses necessary for minimally decent living in most areas of the country today were not part of the lives of many Americans in the early 1950s. Even though food prices have risen since 1955 at practically the same rate as general inflation, food today accounts for barely a sixth of the average family budget, rather than a third. Continuing line in the same way it was originally intended: given the Department of Agriculture's thrifty food budget of $4,576 for a family of four, and the proportion of the average family budget spent on food (about a sixth), the poverty line in 1994 should have been about $26,000-not $15,100. Even this amount would provide no more than the barest necessities. To the thrifty food budget of $4,576 add the cost of a two-bedroom apartment for four people that meets the government's definition of a low-cost rental unit, including the minimum charge for utilities and local telephone service: $512 a month, or $6,144 a year. Add the cost of operating, insuring, and keeping in working repair a single ten-year-old car, along with a little money for public transportation: $3,700 a year. Add no more than $250 for each family member for clothing; $2,000 for all medical, pharmaceutical, and dental expenses; personal and household expenses of $3,900 for everything from toothpaste to household repairs; and, finally, federal $3,270. These frugal expenditures come to nearly $25,000-with no provision for entertainment, vacations, child care, emergencies, or savings. No wonder respondents to a 1994 Roper survey thought that about $25,000 was the lowest income required for a family of four just to get by. In 1955 the official poverty-line income for a family of four would have stood at 59 percent of the median income for all married-couple families; by 1994 it had dropped to 33 percent. In other words, whereas the poverty line originally measured the poor, it has come to measure the very poor. Imagine a family of four living on $15,100 (almost 40 percent less than the $25,000 budget just described) trying to find decent housing with no more than about $300 a month for rent and utilities combined, having no more than $52 a week to spend on food for four people-sixty-three cents a meal per family member. Instead of measuring the very poor, the poverty line should be restored to its intended function-defining the level above which a. Practicing the work ethic should enable people to achieve this standard of living. It describes the promise of the American Dream. In 1994 there were more than 65 million Americans living in households unable to attain this standard. But the federal government reported only 38 million as poor. Since 1972, by the poverty measure as it was originally intended, the proportion of Americans who are poor has grown from approximately 17 percent to more than 25 percent, despite the sizable growth over that period in the proportion of all adults who have joined the labor force and taken jobs. The connection in the everyday world between practice of the work ethic and reward has broken down, virtually unnoticed, during the past two generations. In the early 1950s the minimum wage paid about 110 percent of the amount required for a household with two full-time workers and children to get along. Full-time work at the minimum wage brought entry into the bottom of the middle class. By the 1970s the minimum wage for two workers had dropped provides less than 70 percent. Today more than 12 million full-time yearround workers are paid wages beneath those needed to support a minimally decent standard of living for households with children. Two thirds of workers who start at subpar wages are unable to lift themselves to a decent wage even after a decade of continuous full-time work. Likewise, many millions of other workers in part-time jobs because they can't find full-time work also fall short. During the past half century a new notion of the American Dream has taken hold among us. The belief that anyone who is willing to work and persevere can live decently has allowed us to assume that people with insufficient incomes are not deserving-perhaps not even if they work hard. In place of the precept that people who practice the work ethic will succeed, the nation has moved close to accepting a paradigm of meritocracy, on all rungs of the income ladder. However intuitively appealing, meritocracy has a social Darwinist side. Building on the idea of rewarding ability, talent, and the existence of low-paying jobs on the grounds that people who can not make the grade don't deserve a decent wage. This philosophy is exclusive, not inclusive. Whereas everybody can develop a strong moral character, not everybody has the ability, talent, cleverness, or knowledge that the market may demand. False official measures hide the reality that for large and increasing numbers of Americans, the economic foundation necessary to support a family, the morality of individual responsibility, and the work ethic is disappearing. *
The post-presidency ofBill Clinton will, like the Clinton administration be noisy and attention -- getting. will it accomplish anything - or turn out to be limbo in overdrive? Clinton is the youngest ex-President since Teddy Roosevelt - and he is still the most skillful politician in the Democratic Party. What he does with the rest of his life will set a precedent for the growing number of vigorous and long-lived ex-Presidents to come // Late last year I spent an afternoon talking with Bill Clinton in Fayetteville, at the University of Arkansas. When it was over, all I wanted was to get either a coffee or a beer. Clinton had made one major speech and several other appearances earlier that day, and was due in Chicago that night. As we stepped out of the interview room, we found scores of people still waiting to catch a glimpse of him. Naturally he headed for them and, with apparent delight, shook hands with each person and had his picture taken with most. Once, such a performance could have been explained as part of his thirty-year he likes to. And because he can. Two years after he left the White House at age fifty -- four, the youngest former President since Theodore Roosevelt, nearly a century earlier, Bill Clinton remains almost alarmingly vigorous. Roosevelt, who was an ex-President at fifty, had served seven years and could have chosen to run again. He soon regretted not having done so, and for the next presidential election he was back, in a losing effort as the Bull Moose Party nominee. But running for President is one of the very few options not open to Bill Clinton. (Before Clinton only Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan were affected by the Twenty-second Amendment, and both were too old and sick to have run again anyway.) Clinton would clearly run again if he could. In speeches he says he was "too young" and "too restless" to just retire after leaving office. What will he do with himself? How he uses these stores of energy is of obvious importance to us, both because of factors peculiar to Clinton and because of general trends in the role of former Presidents. The factors peculiar to Clinton involve the aftereffects of his presidency. His central rhetorical theme in office concerned transition - building the "bridge to the twenty-first century," moving the economy from the industrial to the technological age, expanding alliances to reflect the end of the Cold War, changing the Democratic message so that the party could win national elections. The strategy was an obvious success while Clinton was in office. But two years after his departure the completion of each transition is in doubt. Clinton's Vice President, Al Gore, could not hold the presidency. Clinton himself probably could have done so, as he is known to believe, which only reinforces the suspicion that his two terms demonstrated personal virtuosity more than lasting institutional effect. Consider the contrast with Ronald Reagan: Reagan was not in shape to have won a third term, but his Vice President, the elder George Bush, helped it toward its current natural-majority status in Congress. The prosperity of Clinton's 1990s, hailed as a "long boom" then, is being reconsidered as a "bubble" now. Both labels overstate reality, but the prolonged current recession inevitably raises doubts about the previous gains. The main defense and security problem of the moment, dealing with terrorism, is one that Clinton today says he was deeply concerned about, but it was hardly the centerpiece of the Administration's public statements. Clinton is lionized around the world to an extraordinary degree. He is more popular in most foreign countries than those countries' own leaders. When he appeared with Tony Blair last fall at the British Labour Party's annual conference, and made an indirect but unmistakable attack on the domestic policies of George W. Bush, he received a two-minute standing ovation and rapturous comment in the press. "There is no single definition of what makes a great political speech," the Guardian observed in a representative editorial. "Yet in any doubt that they had just heard one... If one were reviewing it, five stars would not be enough... What a speech. What a pro. And what a loss to the leadership of America and the world." The performance was so powerful that Blair promptly called Bush to assure him of his continued loyalty and support. At another recent gathering in England, Clinton so upstaged all others, including Blair, that some attendees thought the Prime Minister was miffed. In response to a question I put to him Blair graciously said of Clinton, "I'm giving no secrets away by saying his contribution was, for many people, the highlight of the weekend... People listen because they know that he knows what he is talking about." Yet in his own country Clinton's position is as ambiguous as ever. An illustration of a point everyone understands: On my way to hear Clinton's speech in Fayetteville, I was trapped in traffic amid the throngs of supporters eager to get used the time to give an extra-detailed explanation of why Clinton was not simply a terrible President but perhaps the greatest liar ever born. The polarizing nature of Clinton's personality is a given. But while in office he could always point to his "job approval" rating - essentially, public gratitude for peace and prosperity - as proof of his worth. Retroactively that rating is being revised. Although he can not run for re-election, he may feel he has to run for history's approval, as Jimmy Carter has done with his good works, and as Richard Nixon attempted to do with his many books about foreign policy. And as was the case with Nixon and Carter, the end of Clinton's presidency has not meant the end of a vociferous anti-Clinton chorus in politics and parts of the press. In short, Clinton has both motive and opportunity to keep himself in the public eye: motive because of doubts about his legacy; opportunity because of his vigor and relative youth. His circumstances fit the post-presidency as part of political life. When George W. Bush took office, America had five living former Presidents. Only once before, and briefly, had there been so many. A series of one-term administrations in the pre-Civil War decades left five ex-Presidents on the scene at the start of Abraham Lincoln's term. (Several of them opposed Lincoln's anti-slavery policies, and one, John Tyler, was actually elected to the Confederate House of Representatives.) The difference now is all the structure, expectations, and opportunities that come with being an ex-President. A presidential-library system gives former Presidents a reason to raise millions of dollars, and provides a venue for conferences, staff reunions, historical displays, and so on. There are corporate directorships, the lecture circuit, celebrity golf tournaments. A world media market has made U.S. Presidents some of the best-known people on earth. They are invited to give speeches, receive awards, resolve disputes, support worthy causes. Foreign publishers bid eagerly for rights to these opportunities, but the younger they are, the more opportunities they are likely to seize. They have more energy. They need more money for the years ahead. They often have more to prove. They have more time in which to carry out their plans. When Jimmy Carter received the Nobel Prize, twenty-two years after he left the White House, he was only a few months older than Ronald Reagan had been at the end of his second term. Carter was fifty-six when he left the presidency, Reagan seventy-nine. Younger politicians and longer life-spans mean that the future is likely to hold more Carters and Clintons. George W. Bush is Clinton's contemporary, so he would be fifty-eight after one term or sixty-two after two. America has one very active former President in Carter and is now getting another in Clinton. They are a preview of the future. Over the course of last fall I had a variety of brief exchanges with Clinton, extensive interviews with many of his past appointees and current Fayetteville. I also saw Clinton perform before a variety of audiences, large and small. Simply as an experience, this was like coming across a champion athlete who had retired in his prime - Sandy Koufax, say - and seeing that he still had the old stuff. No one else in modern politics has matched Clinton's ability to speak with equal poise to people at every level of class, education, and sophistication. To skeptics, this is further proof that Clinton is a chameleon. To me, it demonstrates a combination of emotional and intellectual acuity that other people would copy if they could. Seeing Clinton explain himself to a wide variety of audiences was like meeting Koufax in the late 1960s and watching him toss a ball around. // The immersion also left me with two feelings about the nature of his post-presidency. One is that it will be very much like his Administration. It will be noisy and controversial. It will rely heavily on his skills as a speaker, a charmer, contemptuous detractors. And it will present Clinton with a challenge he faced throughout his Administration: that of deciding on, and sticking with, a finite number of activities, causes, and principles from the vast range available to him. Clinton's daily life appears to be a toned-down but still recognizable version of his White House existence. He travels in ordinary sedans or SUVs rather than in an armored limousine - but he still moves through town in a two- or three-car entourage with Secret Service agents and an aide. He can't travel on Air Force One anymore, and he mentioned the agony of returning occasionally to normal airline travel. But he still travels all the time, and advance workers radio back and forth to one another about his movements. The pressure for time on his schedule would seem intense to anyone but a sitting President. I can attest that every time I saw him in a public gathering, throngs were clamoring to catch his eye. He is always on the phone, to political drizzly late-October afternoon, as he walked onto the site of his presidential library, in Little Rock, an aide handed him a cell phone. "Gray, how ya' doing?" It was the governor of California, Gray Davis, checking a few details in the final stages of his re-election drive. If Clinton's in box was jammed with decision memos during his presidency, it's full of temptations and suggestions now. He could be the best-paid speaker in the world. He could endorse products or be dealt into businesses. Some of his associates think that Clinton's future is as an author, whether of policy books or mystery novels. Some think he should be the new Mayor Richard Daley, wielding power and developing strategies for the hapless Democrats. Some think he should be the old Bill Clinton - the leading voice of the Democrats against the Republicans. Some think he could beat Jimmy Carter's record as an international peace -- maker, because his greater political skills would better equip him me that Clinton could and should succeed Nelson Mandela as unofficial President of the Third World. With luck Clinton could do one or a few of these things. No one could do more than a few. The risk, as one of his former senior officials told me, is that "in trying to make a difference in all, he makes a difference in none." (This is the place to note that members of the Clinton diaspora - a term some of them actually use - are reluctant to be quoted by name when expressing even mildly skeptical thoughts.) Clinton recognizes this danger - in theory. When you leave the presidency, he told me, "you lose your power but not your influence, but the influence must be concentrated in a few areas." Still, at the moment he is trying to do almost everything - write a book, lead international causes, make money, offer advice. We'll soon see whether he can be more disciplined out of office than this: Whatever path Clinton finally takes, it will not lead him far from the public stage. To the relief of some Americans and the annoyance of others, he is not going away. Clinton has been an international figure for barely a dozen years. He may have twice that long ahead of him. He will be post-President for life. Bill Clinton has done a few things that are routine in his two years out of office. He has struggled to find the right direction; he has planned a presidential library; he has made a lot of money. A word about each of these. "In almost every case it takes them a while to figure out what to do with themselves," Alan Brinkley, a historian at Columbia University, says of ex-Presidents in general. "The exceptions are few. John Quincy Adams is the most obvious one - he was back in the House two years after leaving the presidency." Teddy Roosevelt immediately went on a year -- long safari to of the next year before re-emerging as a Bull Moose. "Some Presidents never establish a particular role for themselves," Brinkley says. "Actually, most of them. They write their memoirs, build their libraries, play golf, make speeches, have no major role in public life." Harry Truman left office with dismal approval ratings and did not survive to see his rehabilitation. Lyndon Johnson went into a quick decline in Texas, looking as if he were literally being killed by the controversy over the Vietnam War that had destroyed his presidency. In his first year out of office Clinton fit this part of the pattern. The last-minute pardons he had issued sent him off in a new cloud of controversy and withering criticism. At least one big-ticket speaking engagement was canceled as a result. He was taken to task for booking expensive midtown office space in Manhattan, and he ended up in Harlem -- which he now says was the best solution all along. And he turned his attention to his presidential library. (Or the eleventh "official" one. The Richard Nixon Library, in Yor- ba Linda, is not recognized or operated by the National Archives, because of an ongoing dispute over presidential papers.) What now seems a timeless tradition was actually begun by Franklin Roosevelt, in 1939, to concentrate the archives of a presidency rather than letting them be scattered among aides and souvenir dealers. The libraries have become strangely revealing testaments to each President's style and character. Lyndon Johnson's library, on the University of Texas campus, is the dominant feature in the view of Austin from the interstate highway. Clinton's library is meant to be "more than just a little shrine to me," as Clinton put it in our interview. Instead, in keeping with the standard rhetoric of his Administration, it is intended to be "America's first museum about our transition into a new millennium - about a new way of working, of relating to each other and the rest of, by the way, is the William J. Clinton Foundation. At his speeches now the former President is always introduced as William Jefferson Clinton. His office e-mail domain is @owjc.org, for "office of William Jefferson Clinton." Jimmy Carter received his Nobel Prize as Jimmy Carter, but at some point in the past few years "Bill" Clinton officially disappeared. Clinton's library will cost some $165 million to build, and he is trying to raise $200 million for its construction and an operating endowment. Clinton is careful to point out that he now devotes half his time to "public service": which ranges from charitable and international work to fundraising for his party. He also stresses that his mountain of debt, approximately $10 million in legal fees from the impeachment and other problems, is the reason he is spending only half his time this way. "After I get my legal bills of stuff, I'd like to get where I can just spend a hundred percent of my time on public service," he told me. "That's my objective, and I hope by the time I'm sixty I'll be able to do that" At his pace that goal should be well within reach. Even though Clinton has never been accused of being motivated mainly by money, the money is rolling in. "He used to joke that he'd be the poorest member of our class until he left the White House," one of his college classmates told me. "Then he'd be the richest." Hillary Clinton received $8 million for her upcoming book, and Bill Clinton's book deal has been widely reported as worth between $10 million and $12 million. Because Hillary Clinton is in the Senate, her spouse's income from speaking fees must be disclosed annually. According to the report for 2001, in his first year out of office Bill Clinton made $9.2 million a low of $28,100 for an appearance at the London School of Economics to a high of $350,000 from the Congresso Nazionale della Pubblicita, or National Advertising Council, in Milan. He got $250,000 apiece for appearances before groups in Hong Kong, Spain, Brazil, and Germany, as well as for attending a Fortune magazine conference in New York. He made a three -- day, three-speech swing, for a total of $550,000, through Sweden, Austria, and Poland, and another three-day, three -- speech tour, earning himself $450,000, for the Miki Corporation of Japan. The Jewish National Fund, in the United Kingdom, paid $400,000 for three speeches in three days in England and Scotland. "He has literally a lifetime of six-figure speeches ahead of him, depending on how many he wants to do," Robert Barnett, the lawyer who represents Clinton in his business deals, including publishing and speaking arrangements, told me. "He could give two speeches every day of the year." Associated Press that invitations were "piling up like airplanes over La Guardia on a foggy day," and that he was "positive" Clinton would be able to keep up the lucrative stream indefinitely. In addition to his star quality and his ability to give a strong speech, Clinton leaves customers happy because of his willingness to stay, socialize, and press the flesh. "He'll greet every guest, pose for every picture, answer every question, sign every autograph: Barnett says." One afternoon at four o'clock I got a call from him in my office. He'd finished a speech in Hong Kong, where it was five A.M. He said, "Yeah, I just got done shaking hands." The view in the Clinton camp is that he has relentlessly taken the high road to pay his debts. He has turned down all the thousands of product endorsements, autograph and memorabilia deals, and similar offers that have poured into his office from around the world., Clinton kidded Bob Dole about his commercials for Viagra. The two were appearing together on Larry King Live, to raise money for children who had lost parents in the September 11 attacks. You could practically see Dole considering, one by one, the many comebacks he could make to this gauche comment. Finally he bit his tongue. To anyone other than Clinton, Viagra would seem the last subject about which he should jest. Clinton must have felt entitled because he'd rejected all ads himself. One former senior official, after marveling at Clinton's intellectual and personal abilities, said he was counting the days until the debts were paid and Clinton could go off the circuit "If you look down the list of people he has addressed, it is pretty undistinguished," this person said. "I'm not sure he actually addressed the New Jersey Beer Distributors, but he's addressing groups like the New Jersey Beer Distributors." For the record, the speaking list includes Success Events International, Profit Associates, $125,000; an executive-search firm in Spain, $200,000; Colonial Life Insurance of Trinidad-Tobago, $200,000; and the Greater Washington Society of Association Executives, $125,000. In fairness to Clinton, he does have those debts, and any other way of raising so much money so fast from endorsements to corporate consultancies to sweetheart venture-capital deals, would seem more compromising. The test will be whether he has actually stopped buck-raking by age sixty, in 2006. Then there are those of Clinton's activities that are unusual. "If you look at the former Presidents that played a real role, they basically break down into three types." This was Clinton's response when I asked him which historical models he thought fit his own case. The first group is represented by Thomas Jefferson; these are the ex-Presidents who kept a hand in politics through relationships with successors and proteges. "Jefferson essentially went back to his business but continued to exercise great indirect influence over the affairs of the country," Clinton, counseled them. Richard Nixon also illustrates this approach, though Clinton did not mention him. Clinton's second group is made of ex-Presidents who return to direct involvement in presidential politics. Theodore Roosevelt is known for his failed attempt to regain the presidency. Grover Cleveland is the only man ever to return to the White House after being voted out. "Then there is the "find some other way to serve" model," Clinton said. The best-known examples here are John Quincy Adams, with his return to the House, and Jimmy Carter. "But there are two other important examples." One is Herbert Hoover, who in his seventies, after a long period in the wilderness, complied with Harry Truman's request that he chair the Hoover Commission on government reorganization. The other is William Howard Taft, who in his mid-sixties became Chief Justice of the United States. So which was the path for Clinton? More Carter than anything else, he said. "I had to Id been in one vein for thirty years. I didn't want to go back to elective office. I didn't want to be a judge. And I wanted to be more active than Hoover. That's why I mainly thought, Carter." Some of the activities Clinton is now considering or undertaking can be fit into either the Jefferson or the Carter category, but whichever model ultimately dominates, he faces the problem of deciding how many things he can try to do. His ongoing role in politics depends on two traits that even his harshest critics acknowledge: his skill as a speaker and his cunning as a political strategist and tactician. As I observed him at events last fall involving a wide variety of groups, I was reminded of his virtuosity. I won't try to present vignettes, not even of his induction into the Arkansas Black Hall of Fame, because when his words are reproduced on the page, they look much less interesting than they sounded when delivered. At none of in his or her seat, or seemed to lose attention even during hour -- long presentations. At the end of one event in Washington, which occurred while the Senate was preparing to authorize war against Iraq, Clinton initially flummoxed his listeners by saying that instead of Iraq he wanted to discuss... Africa. A deflating sound escaped the crowd, as if air were going out of a huge balloon. I saw at least one reporter stalk out the back door. But an hour later, as Clinton reached his conclusion, every face in the room was turned to him attentively. I actually overheard a grizzled network cameraman, packing up his gear behind me in the press gallery, say, "I had forgotten what he can do." I had interviewed Clinton several times over the years, usually in a more official setting; the long interview I conducted with him in Fayetteville reminded me what the nonstop flow of information out of him is like. Clinton was forty-five minutes late when he strolled into he acted as if he had all the time in the world. He pulled out a big cigar, which he never lit but gestured with throughout our conversation - and for half an hour, before I asked a single question, he delivered a monologue. He gave a long, detailed, unhurried social history of Fayetteville and its environs. He talked about the local architect Fay Jones, whose Thorncrown Chapel, in the Ozarks, won a coveted design award, delivered by Prince Charles. He talked about Robert Leflar, who was a very old member of the Arkansas law-school faculty when Clinton was a very young member - and who for decades traveled once a week to New York to give lectures at New York University. About what victory at the nearby Battle of Pea Ridge had meant to General Grant during the Civil War. And why Isaac Murphy, a schoolteacher from the area who later became Arkansas's governor, led a movement for secession from Arkansas when the state seceded from the Union. So there was no cotton culture! There were actually a hundred and fifteen free blacks in Marion County, ninety miles east of here. That was in the 1850 census, before all the southern states passed rules saying freed slaves had to get out. When the five counties tried to get out of Arkansas, they couldn't, because the counties were the creatures of the state. But Isaac Murphy kept trying..." (Surprisingly, most of this checked out when I looked it up. The easy, encyclopedic display of obscure knowledge must have been the model for President Bartlet's discourses on The West Wing. If you enjoy that kind of display from Bartlet, you'd enjoy it from Clinton.) He mentioned the student who was "basically my first serious girlfriend," a concept to conjure with, but who was wooed away by the son of Sam Walton, the billionaire founder of Wal-Mart. "I mean, all these rich, textured characters. I could tell you stories." Clinton is a bigger, rangier man than one might guess from pictures; his hands and fingers are like a basketball player's. He sat a few inches away, poking toward my chest with his finger or slapping me on the knee. // Eventually he took up the events of the day, with capsule judgments on Iraq options, George Bush's performance, and Al Gore, then still considered the favorite for the 2004 Democratic nomination. On the subject of Iraq, Clinton said, he was "neither fish nor fowl," by which he meant that he was more alarmed about Saddam Hussein's menace than most doves but more concerned about the side effects of unilateral action than most hawks. "It's a funny thing when you're not in office anymore. In some ways your vision is clearer, because you see the big things clearer. But in other ways your vision is cloudier, because you may miss the exigencies of the moment." The heart of his assessment rid of him the wrong way could be as dangerous as leaving him in place. The wrong way would be one that alienated Europe, NATO, Arab and Muslim states, the United Nations, or anyone else who should increasingly be part of "us" The right way would strengthen those same alliances in the process of driving out Saddam Hussein. "My instinct is that the Iraqis will do pretty well when he's gone," Clinton said. "It's just that we can't go around deposing people without global support. Every African leader I know wants Robert Mugabe the President -- turned-tyrant of Zimbabwe gone. But they'd be mad if we sent fifty thousand soldiers to depose him." In his speech earlier that day Clinton had made the case for international rather than unilateral efforts by arguing that America's current world dominance is "clearly a fleeting moment" that will end when China and India fulfill their ambitions and other powers rise. Therefore the United States should use the "magic the moment passes. After a summer in which it seemed to disdain the need for or the value of allied cooperation, the Bush Administration had taken its case against Iraq to the United Nations. I asked Clinton what he thought accounted for this. He ran through a list of suspects, trying to identify the people or forces that had changed Bush's mind. Perhaps Tony Blair? Blair had been faultlessly supportive of Bush in public, but Clinton suggested that the Prime Minister" probably has been quite effective behind the scenes "in advocating an allied approach." Blair took the problem very seriously. He was somewhat bullish on our ability to have good things happen in Iraq. But he also was determined to pull for the moderates in the Bush Administration who wanted to do this, if at all possible, with a broader alliance and in a way that strengthened the multilateral process. "Maybe Brent Scowcroft, National Security Adviser to the elder George Bush? Perhaps his celebrated summer op-ed opposing unilateral war." "And I think that the hawks were somewhat sobered by the reactions of the Germans and other allies," Clinton said. "They might have complained about it, but they heard it... And Colin, you know, Secretary Powell, he must have been weighing in." But Clinton's central judgment was that Bush himself was responsible for the shift away from a threatened unilateral war: "I think President Bush has pretty good political instincts." He raised his eyebrows at this point, so that I would appreciate the significance of this praise. "I think his antennae are sharper than, you know, the **25;1858;TOOLONG wing. I think he's got a sense of what the traffic will bear." "It might all be a ruse," Clinton said of the Bush strategy of working through the United Nations. "But it looks legitimate. It looks to me like it's a real straight-up deal. I tried to support the President's speech in Cincinnati which endorsed the UN. I think changing this resolution so that it called for tougher inspections was really smart. Because, I mean, how are the French or Russians going to justify a vote against real inspections in favor of phony inspections?" He continued, "That's sort of my take on it. I like where this thing is going. It seems - it feels legitimate. It feels like this is not just a vast charade, preparing for conflict. If that's true, and the conflict comes, we'll have much broader support and be much closer to where we were in Kosovo." The allied effort in Kosovo is for Clinton and his associates the gold standard of international peacekeeping cooperation. "And that will guarantee a much greater likelihood of success in the aftermath. And if, God forbid, Saddam does use or give away any of those weapons, we'll have a more broadly shared responsibility, because everybody else is going to be aware of the risks just like we day the conservative pundit and sometime presidential candidate Pat Buchanan had said that George W. Bush had a "look in his eye" that showed he was determined, one way or another, to go to war. "A lot of the liberals think that too," Clinton said. "And I think part of Bush does want to do it." "If I were one of those guys" - by which he meant veterans of the first Bush Administration - "I would feel pretty bad that I got talked into this hundred-hour war in 1991. But Ive never criticized the Bush Administration for not deposing Saddam Hussein. Because I know the facts. And the facts are that George Bush had to promise not to march on Baghdad to get the Arab support." Clinton was notably respectful when talking about the current President, in part because he understands from experience the difficulties of coping with Saddam Hussein. "I'm not criticizing President Bush on this, because I did the same thing, pontificated about how Saddam is "the only guy to use chemical weapons on his own people,' Yeah, he did that, and the Reagan Administration was for him when he did it" - during the Iran-Iraq war. "Nobody raised a peep then, because he was against Iran." Clinton seemed less engaged when it was time to talk about Al Gore. Weeks after our interview, after Gore had announced his decision not to run, Clinton e-mailed a response to a question I had asked: "I believe history will show that Al Gore did more good things for Americans as Vice President than any other person who ever had that office." But when I asked him in the fall what he thought of Gore's highly publicized speech in San Francisco in September, in which Gore had said that the Administration was using the prospect of war for political ends, Clinton said he hadn't heard or read the speech - a revealing admission in itself. "All I read were the, basically the only one during our discussion --" my observations would be three. "His first big point was that Gore had a legitimate beef. A computer disk had recently turned up containing a memo from Karl Rove, Bush's chief political adviser, that emphasized the value of the war issue in the 2002 midterm elections. "I can only imagine what they would have done to us if they'd found a computer disk that said, 'Hey, we've got to bomb Bosnia because we're not in good shape for the '94 elections.' I mean, they would have just killed us!" His second point was that it was also legitimate to discuss various means of conducting a war, including working through the United Nations. But - point three - it was important to raise questions "in the context of this serious problem we face from Iraq." "Al and I, we had endless conversations about Iraq," Clinton said, somewhat seigneurlike. "of being strong on the importance of trying to contain Saddam Hussein and dealing with his chemical and biological weapons. So if he said what I think he said, I think it's fine." Clinton then began to talk more directly about American domestic politics. His very existence poses a dilemma for the Democratic Party. On the one hand, he is still the best explainer, fundraiser, and campaigner the party has. During his speech at the Labour Party conference Clinton made the case against the Bush Administration's economic policies more effectively than any congressional Democrat has dared or managed to do. On the other hand, Clinton's power seems strangely nontransferable. He could get himself elected, even after working himself into terrible binds. But compared with, say, Ronald Reagan, he has not had tremendous coattails - for his Vice President, for candidates in the House or the Senate, for his party nationwide. So arguments swirl among Democrats at all levels about where Clinton, like some sixteen-inch gun he speak more in public? Should he stick to a backstage role? Can he teach others what he knows? The Democrats are gravitating back toward Clinton's original slogan, "It's the economy, stupid," and they realize that Clinton might help to bring attention to the issue. Robert Rubin, Clinton's Secretary of the Treasury, told me that over the next year and a half the basic premises of economic policy should come up for debate, especially "fiscal discipline" - that is, controlling budget deficits. "The people who want tax cuts can't justify them if they're also concerned about fiscal rectitude," Rubin said. "So they'll have to say that fiscal discipline doesn't matter. In my view, that's nonsensical -- and at odds with virtually all mainstream economic thinking -- but it's the only thing they can say." Clinton could be "enormously effective" in making the fiscal argument, Rubin said -- if he could find an "Clinton's associates think that the only appropriate forum would be something august and nonpartisan, such as a university or a blue-ribbon commission. Others say to hell with augustness, get back into the fray. There was never a serious chance that Clinton would undertake a daily daytime talk show, on the Oprah model, because of its confining schedule. But some activists have tried to sell him on a weekly or monthly prime-time talk show, which would position Clinton as a hybrid of Ted Koppel, Bill Moyers, and FDR. Clinton just waved his hand when I asked him about talk-show options. What he did say about direct involvement in today's debates is that he doesn't want to "take up oxygen" that the struggling preemies of the Democrats' next generation need in order to survive. "Look," he said. "I can't run." In his tone he reminded me again of a champion athlete whose career had come to an unnaturally early end. "If somebody needs nobody else can do it, Ill go do it." He pointed out that he had appeared at more than a hundred fundraising events for the party and its candidates in 2002. "I'd like for my direct political involvement to go way down... but this year I don't know who else would have done it if I hadn't." The political role Clinton says he prefers, and toward which he is moving, is that of strategist, coach, and rabbi for the Democrats' next presidential campaign. He said he has friendly relations with all the announced or presumed candidates-which in the absence of Al Gore means John Edwards, John Kerry, and Joseph Lieberman, from the Senate; Dick Gephardt, from the House; and Howard Dean, from the statehouse in Vermont "If they want to talk to me, I'll talk to them and give them my best advice:" Clinton said. But he made it dear that he would not pick a favorite or -- despite his race by talking about how each was doing against the field. The closest he came to a handicap statement was, surprisingly, about John McCain. "Senator McCain has become increasingly outspoken on progressive issues that make him attractive to Democrats," Clinton replied by e-mail last year. "I wish he would join our party. But I think it is unlikely." Tom Daschle, who had considered a run, told me, "I am quite sure that every person who has contemplated seeking the presidency has attempted to build a better relationship with him. I think he is widely acknowledged as one of the best political strategists not only of our time but of any time." John Podesta, Clinton's former chief of staff, said that Clinton would avoid leaning toward any favorites because he trusts the primary process to winnow the field: "Ultimately he is brutally analytic, so he thinks, Let's see who emerges as the one with the guts and the gumption, and the ideas and complicated, for some obvious reasons, and the most intriguing tension is between Clinton and Edwards. On paper Edwards is the closest thing to another Clinton. He is a moderate-seeming, youthful-looking, racially progressive, glibly well-spoken "fresh face" from the South. A year ago hopefulness about Edwards and despair over the alternatives triggered an early rush toward him by party activists. According to some members of the diaspora, Clinton, too, hoped Edwards would be the next big thing for the Democrats. But the Edwards campaign soon went into reverse, in the judgment of party elders. The shift began on May 5 of last year, when Edwards appeared on Meet the Press and seemed so ill-informed on so many issues that he looked like the wrong bet to make the Democrats' case against George Bush. In fairness, he was as well-informed as Bush himself had been four years earlier, but not as well-informed as the incumbent he would face in 2004. According to Washington lore, Clinton called Edwards after, young man you've got a great future ahead of you, he is supposed to have said. But, you've got to learn the issues so stay off the airwaves for the next year and hit the books. I asked Clinton if that was true. Not exactly, he said -- which turns out to mean, essentially, yes. "But it's got a smidgen of truth in it" -which he began to explain by offering his theory of presidential elections. "Every presidential election is really about three things. At the bottom level it's about the specific issues. Then there's the big-deal idea. What's this election about? What's the meta-message? And then right at the top is, How do you feel about this person to be President?" Clinton said admiringly that in the 2000 campaign Bush had figured out "the only conceivable meta-issue" for his side. "At the time, I had a sixty-five-percent approval rating. What could they say? Pm not going to be all that much different from them, but with a smaller government and a bigger tax cut. Wouldn't you like that? So they made their deal look like our deal. That let them thread the needle-or at least they got close enough for the events to unfold" How did the formula affect Edwards's chances? Clinton said, "He's a smart, articulate guy. Tough as nails. He's got a compelling life story. He's been a senator as long as George Bush was governor of Texas. But... he's been a senator..." And here the real class divide in politics emerged, as Clinton sees it: between senators, who give speeches and cast votes, and governors, who have to balance large budgets and make departments run. // Four of the past five Presidents have been governors-all except Reagan's Vice President, the first George Bush. The last President elected from the Senate was John Kennedy. "The thing that Clinton did understand," says Al From, one of Clinton's early backers at the Democratic Leadership Council, "is that you have to know what you want to do. What we did for two solid years before Clinton announced was go around the country testing ideas. Governors see the reality of the school system and the welfare system and the tax code." Clinton told me that it was his twelve years as governor, with experience at the delivery end of government, that prepared him for a national campaign. This brought him back to Edwards's predicament. "I never saw the Meet the Press program" he said. "But way before that appearance, when Edwards was making all these other television shows, he called me. I told him: John, you're great on TV. You make a great talk. You can talk an owl out of a tree." (I think he said "owl," but I didn't want to ask and sound like, months before that Meet the Pres thing, that he'd been on TV enough to be hot. Which was good. But if I were in his position, I'd spend lots of time trying to think things through. "Cause I told him that I thought that my association with the Democratic Leadership Council, with the education commissions in the state, with policy boards, with these groups most of you had never heard of, had given me a chance over a ten-year period to decide what I really believed about the big issues facing the country. And to build a meta-message of the bigger themes that would be the basis of my campaign. By the way, the great thing about this approach is that if you win, you don't need to wonder what you'll do. You've actually got something in place." The prevailing wisdom of the moment, though Clinton did not say so directly, is that Edwards has not risen to the challenge. In October, as Hillary Clinton was chosen to speak in a prominent time slot. Edwards had been hoping to speak at the same time but was squeezed out. "Just stand there and look pretty, John,' Hillary called to him mockingly, in a remark that was heard through the chamber (and later reported in Newsweek). Edwards left rather than listen to the speech. With Edwards, and with all the other candidates in the current crop, Bill Clinton's dealings are further complicated by the knowledge that Hillary Clinton could well be a candidate in 2008 if the party fails in 2004. The least candid-seeming comment Clinton made to me, by e-mail, was about his wife's future political prospects: "Hillary has made dear she has no plans to run for President She is working very hard to be the best senator she can be for New York, and rm proud of all she has already accomplished for our state and America and the world. We have worked for many of the same things throughout regard." As I look again at those last three words, I think this answer may be as artful as many of his others. In addition to choosing the right "Jefferson" course to take in the years ahead, Clinton will also decide which of the various "Carter" possibilities he can sustain. He says he hopes to emulate an underpublicized part of Carter's post-presidential career his success as an author. Carter published one thick, dull book after leaving office -his official memoir, Keeping Faith. Then he turned himself into a best-seller machine with a string of shorter, livelier, more personal books and memoirs, including Turning l*in* about his first run for office, and An Hour Before Daylight, about his boyhood in Plains. With his eight-figure contract from Knopf, Bill Clinton has already been wildly successful by most writers' standards. The book should eventually appear in at least thirty languages-in many cases with special chapters by Clinton about subjects of particular interest to readers in, say, Pacific But the typical White House memoir is a failure in the literary and artistic sense. Even Presidents who, like Carter and Nixon, write other, very interesting books do their worst work in their presidential memoirs. The one widely praised official memoir is Ulysses S. Grants, which Grant wrote as he was dying, in an attempt to pay his bills, and with which he is assumed to have enjoyed the guidance of Mark Twain. Clinton has told his associates that he has read all previous presidential memoirs, even the most obscure, plus other celebrated autobiographies, such as those of Lillian Heilman and Katharine Graham. Clinton has put high hopes on writing a book that will be celebrated, rather than one that just pays the bills. In part this is natural vanity. "You know, this is scary," he told me. "Even if you've been totally honest, and think the book is you... what if people don't like it? You can't make 'em buy from The Producers. Sometimes they won't come and you can't make 'em?" He laughed broadly. His uncertain tone could have been an act, but he sounded like someone who is bulletproof in his chosen field but now is exposing himself on new terrain. Also, if this book succeeds, Clinton has more he would like to write. He is a voracious reader of mysteries, and like many such people, he has fantasized about writing some of his own. The book project highlights the question about Clinton's ability to focus. Writing a book is lonely and demoralizing work, even for someone who is not traveling every other day and making a hundred speeches a year. The hardest thing to imagine him doing is sitting alone for hours on end, staring at a notepad or a screen. Is he temperamentally fit for this process? "Yes," he said sharply and immediately. "You know, I was scared to death I wouldn't be able to do it barn behind his house in Chappaqua and set it up as a writing studio. He has his lifetime's accumulation of memorabilia: the programs from his schoolboy band concerts, every letter he wrote his mother in college and every letter she wrote back, the thoughts he tape-recorded every month or so while in the White House. There are more than eighty hour-long tapes in this collection, which he has had transcribed. "I organize this stuff. I bring the boxes in. And I sit and I write in a notebook." A jab at the chest for me on each stressed word. "Some of this has been painful for me," he said, "but it's all been wildly instructive. And it convinced me that nearly every person over fifty should find a time to sit down and engage in the same exercise, even if you never intend to publish anything. You need to think about what really meant something to you. Who did you really love? Who really made would be doomed if it involved a ghostwriter. The stilted tone would give it away. His main literary help comes from Ted Widmer, an American historian at Washington College, in Maryland, who was a speechwriter on Clinton's national-security staff. Widmer meets with Clinton once or twice a month for a day, and asks him questions to draw out his recollections. The sessions are taped, and Clinton works from the transcripts. What remains to be seen is whether the diction and pacing that serve Clinton so well as a speaker will survive the transition to the page. His formal speeches are not encouraging. I'm not sure the Guardian would have accepted as an op-ed article the speech that it praised so highly. His editor, Robert Gottlieb, who has seen several hundred pages of manuscript, presumably knows how it's going, but he is not free to discuss the book with reporters until it comes out, in 2004. As if all this were not enough, Clinton is also undertaking several Carter. One is the struggle to control AIDS worldwide. In a speech this past fall at the Woodrow Wilson Center, in Washington, Clinton argued that AIDS is the most complicated and potentially most important international challenge of the next decade. He pointed out that medicines available in the developed world have largely made AIDS possible to live with. Yet in Africa, India, China, and elsewhere, tens of millions of people are likely to die from the disease-perhaps as many as were killed in the wars and genocide of the twentieth century. Politically, strategically, and economically this largescale death will have tremendous ripple effects throughout the Third World. And as a moral issue, Clinton said, the deaths should be seen as a preventable holocaust. He has joined Nelson Mandela in leading an international effort to improve the medical infrastructure of affected countries, so that drug companies and donors in the developed world won't feel they're throwing their money away if they send aid. Clinton's other main international effort comes Peruvian economist and writer. After leaving office Clinton read De Soto's book The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. The book, like De Soto's previous The Other Path, argues that changes in property rights are the key to creating capital for the majority in the Third World and the former Soviet Union. Peasants in the countryside and workers or squatters in Third World cities all have "assets;" De Soto says. They run tiny businesses, they tend little plots of land. Together these assets are worth trillions of dollars, or many times more than foreign aid or international loans. But because corrupt or antiquated legal systems do not recognize their rights to these assets, people have neither the ability nor the incentive to create new economic value in a market system. // De Soto is not at all a conservative by American political standards, but because of his emphasis on property rights, his acclaim in the United States has come mainly from the right Soto to say that he was much impressed by Mystery and that he would like to get together. "We had a meeting that went about three hours" De Soto told me. "What surprised me is that he had actually read the book cover to cover and thought about it. Then he told me, rve got a big chunk of my life, hopefully, ahead of me, and I want to do some good in this world. I think you're off to doing something really extraordinary, and I would like to become involved.". Since that time Clinton has praised De Soto's work as "the single most significant systematic thing going on in the world economically." He has also served as a middleman for the main action De Soto is proposing: namely, revising the constitutions, laws, and property regimes of developing countries to foster the growth of a market system. As De Soto puts it, his main audience is heads of state. In Afghanistan, in has offered to participate directly in helping to bring these legal-reform projects to fruition. "His value is precisely as a politician who can help them work out the compromises," De Soto said. "And in every country I have seen he is, strangely, seen not as an American but as an approachable honorary citizen." Another associate said, "It's all the harder for him to pass up the foreign opportunities, because there is so much demand for him. He likes keeping this out of the American media, so they're not all over him with questions about motives." Clinton's impact is potentially more sweeping in these regards than Carter's, because it involves the work of politics on a broader scale. As De Soto says, "Jimmy Carter's heart is in the right place, but when he comes to visit, it is as a respected gringo. Mr. Clinton goes beyond that, though he doesn't speak another language." It was De Soto who so broad that he could serve as a younger, more engaged successor to Nelson Mandela. But even De Soto wondered whether the very breadth of Clinton's potential might be a problem. As a former senior appointee of Clinton's said, "There is one thing Jimmy Carter has that Bill Clinton lacks. That is a kind of dogged discipline. There is a kind of promiscuity in Clinton's interests, even though there is a greater need for discipline when he has fewer resources at hand. I have no doubt that he could make a big difference with AIDS in Africa, or in civil rights in the United States, or in increasing state capital in the poorest countries of the world, or in political philosophy: But, this person said, Clinton couldn't do all of these-or succeed in any of them unless he concentrated on one or two. What Bill Clinton can do, in his public struggles to decide which opportunities to pass by, is help show the way for youngish ex-Presidents of of an expanded corps of active ex -- Presidents, he sounded excited in a way that made me think of "The X-Presidents" on Saturday Night Live. "What I would like to see us try to do is first of all find a few things we could do together," he said. "And secondly, if we're still all compos mentis, rd like to see us organize really constructive debates about our honest disagreements-in a respectful way, so America could hear them... Once we've got a handful of people who have been President and don't have a vested interest in hurting anybody else publicly and personally, I think we might be able both to do things together and sort of edify the American people about how to handle our differences." "There is a certain liberation that comes with leaving the White House," Clinton said in a later exchange. "And in that sense there is more room for the kind of contentment that comes with having more free time, But in the bigger scheme of things, I hope never to be too content,' because I consider myself as having a lifelong responsibility to use whatever influence I retain to help other people." Whether people like or hate Clinton essentially turns on whether they believe or scoff at sentences like the previous one. I basically believe him. rve seen enough of the effort he has invested in well-meaning causes, and have heard enough thirdhand testimony about beneficial things he has done, to think that he is trying to do more than simply coast through the years left to him. Because of his youth, vigor, talent, and restlessness, he is sure to mark new parts of the political and social landscape as appropriate for postpresidential involvement. The less cynical our expectations about him, the more valuable his effect is likely to be. n James Fallows is a national correspondent for The Atlantic. Sidebar CLINTON WAVED OFF A QUESTION ABOUT TALK-SHOW OPTIONS. WHAT HE DID SAY ABOUT DIRECT INVOLVEMENT IN TODAY'S DEBATES OXYGEN "THAT THE STRUGGLING PREEMIES OF THE DEMOCRATS NEXT GENERATION NEED IN ORDER TO SURVIVE. Sidebar" I THINK PRESIDENT BUSH HAS PRETTY GOOD POLITICAL INSTINCTS. "CLINTON RAISED HIS EYEBROWS, SO THAT I WOULD APPRECIATE THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS PRAISE. "I THINK HIS ANTENNAE ARE SHARPER THAN, YOU KNOW, THE **25;1913;TOOLONG WING." Sidebar "YOU KNOW, THIS IS SCARY," CLINTON TOLD ME ABOUT WRITING HIS MEMOIR. "EVEN IF YOU'VE BEEN TOTALLY HONEST... WHAT IF PEOPLE DO N'T LIKE IT? YOU KNOW, WHAT WAS THAT LINE FROM THE PRODUCERS-SOMETIMES THEY WO N'T COME AND YOU CA N'T MAKE 'EM?" Sidebar "ONE THING CARTER HAS THAT CLINTON LACKS," A FORMER TOP CLINTON APPOINTEE SAYS: "A KIND OF DOGGED DISCIPLINE. THERE IS A PROMISCUITY IN CLINTON'S INTERESTS, EVEN THOUGH THERE IS GREATER NEED FOR DISCIPLINE WHEN HE HAS FEWER RESOURCES AT HAND." //
SANCTUARY, SHOWCASE, OR FORTRESS, THE HOME IS A REFLECTION OF HUMAN VALUES AND LIFESTYLES. HERE IS A DANISH VISION OF TOMORROW'S DREAM HOMES. Home is your castle; it is a fortress against outside invaders, a sanctuary from external stress. Home is where you hang your hat; you sleep, shower, change clothes, and occasionally eat there. Home is where your heart is; you invite over your friends and relatives, greet important visitors such as your boss and favored clients. The home is the most personal of all human habitats, and the home of the future -- from its furniture to its landscaping -- will accommodate the distinct needs, values, and lifestyles of tomorrow's homeowners. While some castle-keepers will want to hold on to the traditions of the past, others will want the latest in high-tech home communications and entertainment. Denmark's Institute for Futures Studies in Copenhagen took on the task of developing a set of alternative visions of what Danish families of tomorrow will want their homes to be like. The Institute found that -- the so-called "smart house." Some 30% said, in essence, that any change should be ignored and that the only things that matter are the basic, eternal needs of the family. On the other hand, 15% reported a fascination with change, according to Karen Schousboe, head of research at the Institute. These are the avantgarde who enjoy fashion and fads. Some of the things that the Institute believes almost all Danes will share in the next 10 to 20 years include more pressure on available time due to longer workdays; increased interest in hobbies, health activities, and cultural pursuits; more space in the home due to smaller family sizes; increased interest in the environment and nature, manifesting itself in landscape designs and gardening, especially organic foods. "The project ended up by presenting a number of visions for the future of the home," Schousboe told THE FUTURIST. "These visions were presented as a (long) list of conclusions, stories in the form of a which we worked in the project, plus finally a long list of new products (about 1,000), which were developed during seminars at the Institute. Finally, we had a designer draw up visions of a number of "homes of the future" based on the conclusions reached in the seminars." The project's artist, Philip Bro Ludvigsen (called one of Denmark's brightest young designers by Design magazine of London), illustrated four different homes of the future. Each home scenario was assigned a family name, representing one of four archetypal sets of Danish values and lifestyles that were then projected into the dreams and desires of tomorrow's homeowners. * THE HANSEN HOME. Representing the largest segment of Danish population (40%), the "Hansen" family home is a traditional single-family house with a garden. The Hansens expect their home to be a fortress against the outside world's uncertainty; their dream is for a future of certainty, stability, and constancy. * THE PETERSEN HOME. The farm. Individual sections of the garden and individual rooms in the house have strictly separate identities. For instance, the kitchen is the "togetherness" room, while another room would be used solely for relaxation and meditation. About 35% of the Danish population are Petersens -- a higher proportion than would be found among the U.S. population, says Schousboe. The Petersen dream: a visibly coherent life. * THE FRANDSEN HOME. The "Frandsen" family (about 15% of the population) has much the same values as the Hansens but is wealthier. The Frandsens have more-adventurous tastes than the Petersens. The Frandsens use their home as a showcase and emphasize stylishness and status. The home "is always ready to receive unexpected visitors," says Schousboe. The Frandsens dream of economic and social prosperity, but not of change. * THE FOX HOME. The smallest group, about 10% of the Danish population, the "Fox" family is a family on the move, viewing the home almost as a featuring many high-tech devices, are almost Spartan in their functional efficiency. The Fox family dreams of a creative, adventurous life full of change. Schousboe notes that formatting such visions of the future based on models of lifetypes is valuable in other forecasting endeavors. For instance, the model developed at the Institute is also being used to predict the future office and the child of tomorrow.
We are moving toward a future where doctors can practice surgery on "virtual" patients and marketers can sell "virtual" products. Here's a wide-ranging survey of future possibilities bg a virtual-reality expert. Photograph A British housing development created in virtual reality. Architects, landscapers, real-estate developers, and construction companies can use virtual-reality simulations to display and customize houses-as well as the surrounding environment-before building them in the real world. // Virtual reality may be one ot the most important technologies in our future, producing a great leap forward in many fields. While most people now focus on VR's use in entertainment areas, its real impacts will be in the arts, business, communication, design, education, engineering, medicine, and many other fields. Due to the importance of this emerging technology, I would like to dispel some misinformation about it and suggest some important applications it will have in the future. But first, let's get clear about what virtuality is. Defining Virtual Reality Virtual reality can be defined as a three-dimensional, computer-generated simulation in be immersed in another environment. In this sense, "virtual" is derived from the concept of "virtual memory" in a computer, which acts "as if" it is actual memory. Virtual reality provides a reality that mimics our everyday one. Since human beings are primarily visual animals, we respond much better to spatial, three-dimensional images than we do to flat, two-dimensional text and sketches. With three-dimensional images like those produced in virtual reality, we are better able to see patterns, relationships, and trends. Virtual reality goes beyond mere static images to ones that we can navigate through and interact with in real time. We can look at things from any perspective. Virtual reality is also immersive-it draws you into the visualization. Virtual reality is not just a set of devices, but a medium for expression and communication. Virtual reality is a means to create, experience, and share a computer-generated world as realistic or as fanciful as you would like. Headmounted displays, data gloves, this parallel world. Other names for the concept of virtual reality include "artificial reality," "augmented reality," and "telepresence." However, the term "virtual reality," or "VR," seems to have won out in common parlance. The term hooks us with the excitement of creating and experiencing different realities. There is also an ongoing debate over exactly what virtual reality is and what it is not. Most observers agree that one necessary characteristic is that you can navigate in a virtual world with some degree of immersion, interactivity, and a speed close to real time. Hype and Reality Right now, there is a great deal of hype surrounding virtual reality. The technology, s present state of advancement has been overstated. Coverage in numerous magazines and newspaper articles, on TV shows, and even in TV ads suggests that virtual reality is now fully developed. Unfortunately, this is not true. Present virtual-reality visualizations are often low-quality and cartoonish. The picture we see. Few systems allow for tactile feedback-a sense of touch. Some people even question the physiological and psychological safety of virtual reality, particularly in entertainment. However, the future of virtual reality is important and real. We should not abandon the technology because it does not yet fit our expectations. Virtual reality is with us now in a very early and rudimentary form. Its state of development has been likened to the space program in the 1950s or microcomputers in the 1970s. We are just beginning to see the potential of virtual reality. Faster computers, better software, and new devices to inform our senses are expected to come rapidly onto the scene, improving virtual reality and increasing its utility. Better content and new applications will rapidly emerge in the years ahead. Virtual reality will come to us over the Internet, reducing the need for complicated and expensive stand-alone equipment. Don't let the hype fool you. Virtual reality is not fully here yet, but it will become increasingly important for individuals, companies now consider some present and future applications of virtual-reality technology. Our time frame is in the range of the next 10 years and our list is far from being all-inclusive. Virtual reality's uses are still being explored and defined. The only thing we can be certain of is that we'll be surprised and that we must remain open to surprise. Virtual Reality Applications, Today and Tomorrow Architecture and construction. Virtual reality is already showing its potential in the architecture and construction industries. A building can be created as a navigable, interactive, and immersive experience while still being designed, so that both architect and client can experience the structure and make changes before construction begins. It has been said that every building built today is actually a physical prototype, leaving little room for input or changes until after construction. Virtual reality would allow for an electronic prototype to be created and modified, so that costly changes during or after construction are avoided. Photograph An atrium in a virtual building. A virtual simulation of of Technology allowed school officials to "tour" the facility while it was still in the design stage. Photograph Young girl takes a virtual ride on "Aladdin's Flying Carpet" at Disney's Epcot Center. // In the future, clients will want to experience their house or building in virtual reality before final designs are completed and construction begins. Beyond today's capabilities, clients will not only be able to see the structure, but hear sounds from within it, feel its textures, and experience its fragrances. Home builders and real-estate developers are particularly excited about the potential of virtual reality to sell their designs. Why build expensive model homes or demonstration spaces when prospective buyers can see the range of options electronically? City planners will use virtual reality to consider various changes in the community, greatly assisting the work of zoning and planning boards. Art. At present, you can "virtually" visit a number of actual art galleries and museums via the Internet. Recently, the Guggenheim and other museums will change our conception of what constitutes art. A work of art may become a physically navigable, interactive, and immersive experience. You may travel into a virtual painting, which will actually be a mini-world for you to explore. You may interact with its elements, perhaps even change them. You may enter a sculpture gallery and interact with the art pieces. You will actually become part of the art as you interact with it. Business. Already, several companies have created three-dimensional visualizations of the stock market. The stocks appear as upright cylinders (like a stack of poker chips) on a three-dimensional grid representing different sectors of the market. The cylinders (each with a company logo) will rise and fall with stock prices and spin at different speeds as an indication of each stock's sales activity. With this arrangement, a stock broker or analyst can quickly see patterns for a market sector as a whole, as well as the activity of specific stocks. A click on a company's the broker an opportunity to rapidly buy or sell a stock. The use of virtual reality in stock market trading will greatly increase in the future. Those companies trading on various stock markets globally will require this virtual-reality application to identify trends and make trades more rapidly. They will, in fact, be interacting with the stock market in real time. Their work will be much like playing a large and complex video game. Some virtual-reality software developers have been working on a product called FlowSheet. It will be like a spreadsheet, but will show more than mere numbers displayed in two-dimensional columns and rows. Rather, it will give a threedimensional depiction of numbers with varying sizes, shapes, colors, and spatial relationships. In the future, FlowSheets will allow for much clearer and quicker analysis of alternatives, relationships, and trends. Still other software developers are considering the benefits of creating DataSpaces, a step beyond the database. Like the FlowSheet, DataSpaces represents information sources as objects that differ in size, surf through information in a world of three-dimensional objects, selecting the information you need by clicking on the appropriate one. In the next few years, you will be able to conduct this kind of search on the Internet using a recently accepted standard called Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML). Using a combination of the FlowSheet, DataSpaces, and other virtualreality software, companies will be able to simulate their entire operation. Different aspects of operation, such as production, inventory, sales, and productivity, can be represented in three dimensions for analysis. Various "what-if" scenarios could be proposed. A company could also use this system to watch its actual operation in real time rather than in simulation. Disabilities. Several organizations, such as Prairie Software and Hines Veterans' Hospital in Illinois, are experimenting with virtual reality to confirm the accessibility of buildings for people with disabilities. One university, Oregon Research Institute, has created a program that teaches children to operate wheelchairs. Another, the University of Dayton how to ride a bus. Just beginning are many other applications aimed at allowing people with disabilities to experience worlds they can not currently explore due to their physical limitations. Photograph Inspecting radiation contamination safely. With many Cold-War-related sites to decontaminate, the U.S. Department of Energy has been using VR software to create simulations of such buildings for training and demolition purposes. The top image is an actual photo of a contaminated site, while the bottom one is its VR counterpart. // In the future, it will be standard procedure, if not mandatory, to use virtual reality in private homes and public places to test accessibility before plans are approved. People with disabilities will be able to visit new areas virtually before they visit them in the everyday world. They will also be able to experience skiing, hang gliding, and other sports in virtual worlds. Education and training. VR is just beginning to be applied in education and training. Students can study anatomy or explore our galaxy. Some training applications relate to Rochester, New York, allows trainees to walk through a virtual factory and learn about health hazards-a more engaging experience than reading a manual or attending a lecture. In the future, students will be able to learn through studying in virtual worlds. Chemistry students will be able to conduct experiments without risking an accidental explosion in the lab. Astronomy students will be able to visit a range of virtual galaxies to study their properties. History students will be able to visit different historical events and perhaps even participate in the action with historical figures. English students could be on stage at the Globe Theater as it was when Shakespeare's plays were first presented. They will also be able to enter into a book and interact with its characters. Virtual reality will also be used in teaching adults. Trainees in a wide variety of environments will be able to safely try out new techniques. They will be able to learn by doing tasks virtually before applying them in the real world. They will use these practice tasks in job. However, much remains to be done to bring virtual reality fully into the classroom or the training facility. Engineering. Engineers of all descriptions are already using virtualreality simulations to create and test prototypes. Each of the Big Three automakers is using some form of virtual reality to test new models. In the aerospace industry, the new Boeing 777 was the first aircraft to be designed and tested using virtual-reality technology. Physical prototypes take a great deal of time to produce and are very costly. Changes to electronic or simulated prototypes can be done rapidly and inexpensively, shortening development time. Hoping to save money in prototyping and avoid cost overruns, the U.S. military has even coined the phrase, "Sim it before you build it!" In the future, nearly every engineering pursuit will use virtual-reality prototypes so that designs can be shared, evaluated, and modified with input from both co-workers and customers. Even the manufacturing process and expected repairs will be simulated, saving money and aggravation. Given advances in engineers in distant locations around the globe working in teams to design products. Entertainment. Virtual reality is already being applied in entertainment. Location-based entertainment centers are cropping up in major cities around the globe and traveling virtual-reality entertainment shows are on the road. Soon, nearly all video arcades will be VR centers; all games will be 3-D, interactive, and immersive. While the number of such entertainment centers will increase in the future, home-based virtual reality will also grow dramatically. Current systems are primitive, due to a lack of computing power and the high cost of most virtual-reality equipment, but advanced virtual reality is set to invade the home entertainment scene in the years ahead. While stand-alone entertainment systems will be offered, perhaps the most important form of home VR will come over the Internet, and with it the potential for virtual reality to promote human interaction over wide distances. Imagine an adventure game in which you are immersed in a threedimensional world, interacting with other participants. It can become a real are a participant interacting with the plot and other characters. While these kinds of entertainment have been seen as separating participants in the past, in the future they may be seen as a new kind of socializing, one which may lead to richer relationships in the "real" world. Marketing. Virtual reality is just beginning to be used by companies who want customers to experience their products and to understand them better. They've found that a new technology, such as virtual reality, draws people to their exhibits and involves them with a product much more than standard displays. Cabletron, a cable network company in Rochester, New Hampshire, has customers travel through their network virtually. Sopporo, a beer company in Japan, allows customers to visit its production plant to experience the beer-making process in virtual reality. In the future, virtual reality will be used to develop and test products with much greater customer involvement. A company will be able to create products, gain customer feedback, and then modify the only be an electronic idea that they can directly test before creating the physical product. This electronic prototyping may also lead to individualized products that are portrayed in virtual reality, customized by the individual, and then transmitted electronically to a production facility. Medicine. Virtual reality is just beginning to be used in medicine and medical research. The University of North Carolina (UNC) uses it in biochemical engineering. They test the docking of molecules using visual and auditory displays and a forcefeedback device. Virtual reality is also being used at UNC and other locations to practice aiming X-rays before cancer treatments of that type are performed. Several companies, such as High Techsplanations of Rockville, Maryland, and Cine-med of Woodbury, Connecticut, are creating virtual bodies, a kind of "body electronic," to enhance medical training. In the future, medical students will study anatomy by dissecting virtual cadavers-a much more cost effective and efficient way of studying the human body. Medical students and surgeons will practice virtual surgery before attempting a a specific patient, whose unique body characteristics have been scanned into the computer. Different diseases and medical emergencies can also be simulated to test a medical student's or doctor's knowledge regarding treatment. On a different front, virtual reality could be used for treatments in guided visualization. Patients could use virtual reality to assist in visualizing a part of their body for healing. Likewise, virtual reality could help improve relaxation techniques, providing a pleasant world in which to relax. Military. One of the first applications of virtual reality was in flight simulators. Today, these applications are used not only for aircraft simulation, but also for ships, tanks, and infantry maneuvers. With the advent of networked virtual reality, the U.S. military is able to stage SimNet tank battles between various military installations around the world over what it calls the "Defense Simulation Internet." First used extensively in the Gulf War, SimNet allowed nearly every flight and battle to be conducted in virtual reality before the real war began. a large-scale simulation that can test the skill of military leaders and soldiers. In the future, every aspect of warfare will be practiced in simulation before being conducted in a realworld situation. Simulations will become so real, it will become impossible to distinguish the real from the simulated. While there are dangers here in misunderstanding the real from the simulated, it may also be possible for combatants to see the folly of their aggression before a conflict begins. Perhaps we could substitute a virtual war for a real one. Religion. At present, religion does not seem to be making much use of virtual reality. However, there is potential for VR in both religious education and experience. One Christian religious denomination reportedly has been having discussions with a virtual-reality developer about creating biblical scenes in virtual reality. One author, Richard V. Kelly of Digital Equipment Corporation, has proposed the creation of religious experiences from all of the world's various religions. In the future, we can expect to see an array of religious able to experience being at the Sermon on the Mount or even the Crucifixion, among other events in that faith's history. He or she could also explore events in Judaism or Buddhism. Even more profound mystical experiences, such as the prophecies of Ezekiel or a revelation from eastern religions, could be created in virtual worlds. SM Virtual sex is a hot topic. It has been labeled teledildonics by several authors. At least one virtual-reality company, Thinking Software of Woodside, New York, is selling a "cybersex machine," and there are some multimedia sexual experiences that come close to virtual reality. These products are not very advanced, however, and many obstacles must be overcome to produce a satisfying tactile experience. But expect great strides to be made in creating advanced "sex machines" using virtualreality technology. There is too much potential profit in these applications for them not to be pursued. In the future, virtual sex will be either a stand-alone or networked experience. Expect virtual reality to loved one at a distance, and for sexual exploration or, unfortunately, exploitation. Today's 900 number hotlines and sex sites on the Internet will be tame by comparison. Expect major controversy over this topic from lawmakers, religious groups, and proponents of family values. The Promise of Virtual Reality These are just some present and future applications of virtual reality As you can see, there are many potential applications for virtual reality. Perhaps, in the future, we will only be limited by our imagination regarding the uses of virtual reality. Virtual reality is neither good nor bad. It is a new tool that will have important implications in our future. In working in the field of virtual reality, I have found a very important aspect of it that is often overlooked. In order to create virtual worlds, one must have an in-depth understanding of how our everyday world works. Perhaps one of virtual reality's greatest gifts will be helping us to understand better our own reality Author Affiliation John C. Briggs virtualreality development company based in Rochester, New York. He is also the communications director for Author Affiliation the Western New York Futurists, a chapter of the World Future Society. His address is 3238 Winton Road South, E21, Rochester, New York 14623. Telephone 716/424-6198. //
ECONOMICS REVIEWED ON PAGE 53! World Boom Ahead: Why Business and Consumers Will Prosper by Knight Kiplinger. Kiplinger Books. 1998. 404 pages. After seven years of economic expansion and soaring stock prices, some dark clouds are looming. In this book, business journalist Knight Kiplinger looks at the broader outlook for key industries, demographics, and world markets, concluding that we are on the threshold of a surge in living standards as we have never seen, spurred by the spread of new technological breakthroughs. B-2227 Regular Price: $27.95 Member Price $25.50 ENVIRONMENT AND RESOURCES God's Last Offer Negotiating for a Sustainable Future by Ed Ayres. Four Walls Eight Windows. 1999. 340 pages. Mother Earth has become a strange and agitated place, with a proliferation of hurricanes, floods, wildfires, and droughts. What exactly is happening, and what can be done? Worldwatch editorial director Ed Ayres shows that these events are connected, all part of dangerous megaphenomena that may destroy life on Earth if left unchecked. Since many of these problems are of our own making solve them. S-2256 Regular Price: $22.00 Member's Price: $19.95 State of the World 1999: Millennium Edition by Lester R. Brown et al. W.W. Norton. 1999. 256 pages. Paperback. This insightful look at the sweeping changes of the past century and the challenges of the next paints a clear picture of what we must do to build a sustainable economy. The Millennium Edition of the Worldwatch Institute's indispensable annual report includes chapters on the futures of oceans, forests, energy systems, and biodiversity and on reinventing cities and ending violent conflict. B-2240 Regular Price: $13.95 Member's Price: $1295 FUTURE STUDIES The Millennium Report edited by David Woolfson. 2000CDN/Infinica Inc.1998. Looseleaf binder. The Millennium Report offers a comprehensive overview of millennium projects, celebrations, and future-oriented organizations collectively engaged in prospective initiatives. This first edition is part of an ongoing Millennium Information Service led by Canadian futurist David Woolfson; the three-ring binder format allows for quarterly updates that track new and developing millennium projects, events, and initiatives worldwide $63.00 The 21st Century: Macmillan Compendium. Selections from the Two-Volume Encyclopedia of the Future Edited by George Thomas Kurian and Graham T.l. Molitor. Macmillan Library Reference USA. 1999. 999 pages. Illustrated. Selected articles from the original Encyclopedia of the Future are here presented in an attractively bound volume, highlighted with dozens of black-and-white photographs and illustrations. Topics include astronomy, capitalism, creativity, global warming, governance, illiteracy, intellectual property, land-use planning, longevity, marriage, morals, performing arts, population growth, sustainability space travel, television, terrorism, women, work, and much more. B-2250 Regular Price: $135 Member's Price: $125 Also available: Encyclopedia of the Future (Two volumes, 1,115 pages) B-1969 Price: $195 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence by Ray Kurzweil. Viking. 1999. 388 pages. Illustrations. The difference between humans and machines is increasingly blurring. Ray Kurzweil, inventor of the Kurzweil Reading Machine and the Kurzweil synthesizer download their brains into a computer. The marriage of human sensitivity and artificial intelligence will fundamentally alter-and improve-the way we live, he believes. B-2255 Regular Price: $25.95 Member's Price: $23.95 21st Century Technologies: Promises and Perils of a Dynamic Future Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1998.173 pages. Paperback. Technological advances offer extraordinary promises for the next few decades, including revolutions in medicine, agriculture, travel, commerce, and everyday life. This concise collection of essays presents an overview of issues, opportunities, and challenges emerging in computing, biotechnology, and other innovations. Vital reading for decision makers in government, business, and society. B-2253 Regular Price: $23.00 Member's Price: $21.56 WORK Signs of the Times: Guidance Into Your Exciting Future by Roger E. Herman, Oakhill Press. 1999. 175 pages. Roger Herman, co-author of Lean and Meaningful, examines 100 key trends that are shaping the future world of work and careers, such as telecommuting, work-life programs, flexible staffing, He follows up with advice on how to keep abreast of change and take control of vour future work life. B-2254 Regular Price: $16.95 Members Price: $1550 WORLD AFFAIRS Superterrorism: Assassins, Mobsters, and Weapons of Mass Destruction by Glenn E. Schweitzer with Carole C. Dorsch. Plenum Press. 1998. 363 pages. Illustrated. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, criminals who once worked for the communists have now emigrated around the globe and work freelance. South American drug lords are moving into more lethal marketsnuclear arms and materials. Career diplomat Glenn Schweitzer offers insights on these and other future threats to global peace and suggests new longterm solutions. B-2257 Regular Price: $28.95 Member's Price: $26.50 Y2K The Complete Book of Survival: How to Protect Yourself Against Revolution, Riots, Hurricanes, Famines and Other Natural and Man-made Disasters by Rainer Stahlberg. Barricade Books. 1998. 288 pages. Paperback. Are you ready for the next disaster-whether it's a flood, economic collapse, or high-tech terrorism? And could detailed checklists for recognizing the signs of impending doom, stockpiling food and supplies, and maintaining personal and household security. The bottom line: Don't expect government to take care of you, says Stahlberg, who advocates selfdefense, training, and "gumption." B-2181 Regular Price: $25.00 Member's Price: $22.95 Countdown Y2K: Business Survival Planning for the Year 2000 by Peter de Jager and Richard Bergeon. Wiley. 1999. 330 pages. Paperback. The experts who sounded the first alarms about the year 2000 computer problem offer a comprehensive update on what managers must do now to prepare. Includes information on commercial Y2K tools, evaluating risks from vendors and customers, training staff, liability issues, contingency planning, and much more. B-2236 Regular Price: $29.99 Member's Price: $27.00 The Millennium Bug: How to Survive the Coming Chaos by Michael S. Hyatt. Regnery. 1998. 286 pages. Computers are involved in nearly every facet of our lives, and, if they are not fixed in time, computers bring many things to a halt: electricity, financial services, water supplies, communications, and more. In clear, nontechnical language, this book describes the cause and scope of the problem and offers practical suggestions for preparing for life after the crisis. B-2196 Regular Price: $24.95 Member's Price: S22.95 Sidebar AGING AND ANTIAGING Additional reading for the feature article on centenarians (see page 16): Age Right: Turn Back the Clock with a Proven, Personalized Antiaging Program by Karlis Ullis with Greg Ptacek. Simon &; Schuster. 1999. 319 pages. International antiaging expert Karlis Ullis shows you how to create an antiaging regimen tailored to your unique biological profile. The aging process is associated with four key factors: energy, sex, lifestyle, and biomechanical motion. Through a series of self-tests, you can determine your unique antiaging pathway. Includes exercises, sources for nutritional supplements, at-home diagnostic tests, and more. B-2252 Regular Price: $23.00 Member's Price: $21.50 Cheating Death: The Promise and the and Owen Davies. St. Martin's Press. 1998. 224 pages. With advances in medicine and new gene research, the human life-span could extend hundreds of years. But a future of billions of people "cheating death" could have devastating impacts on societies, the economy, the environment, and family life. B-2119 Regular Price: $21.95 Member's Price: $19.95 Life without Disease: The Pursuit of Medical Utopia by William B. Schwartz. University of California Press. 1998. 178 pages. Humanity's dream of life without disease may be realized by the middle of the next century. In 2050, medical care will be vastly more effective and less expensive than today's resource-intensive procedures, such as coronary bypass surgery. Over the next 50 years, genetic interventions will shift the focus of medicine from repairing the ravages of diseases to preventing their onset. In this book, a professor of medicine describes the prospects and problems of striving for medical utopia. B2171 Regular Price: $22.00 Member's Price: $19.95 The Brain-Body Connection hy David Mahoney and Richard Restak. Wiley. 1998. 250 pages. Not only will we live longer in the future, but we will stay sharp, happy, and healthy through old age-if we plan to. New brain research offers insights on the brain-body connection-the relationship among the health of our brains, our attitudes and thought patterns, and our physical health-and suggests ways that you can plan for mental and physical vitality for years to come. B-2157 Regular Price: $22.95 Member's Price: $20.95 Reversing Human Aging by Michael Fossel. Quill. 1996. 307 pages. Paperback. Medical science may soon extend the human life-span by hundreds of years. This book explores the scientific breakthroughs and their implications for society and culture. B-1999 Regular Price: $16.00 Member's Price: $14.50 Stopping the Clock: Why Many of Us Will Live Past 100-And Enjoy Every Minute! by Ronald Klatz and Robert Goldman. Keats Publishing. 1996. 369 pages. Antiaging medicines on the near horizon promise to "turn back the clock" and Price: $22.95 Member's Price: $20.95 //
Editor's Note Headnote Technologies are altering the way we work-and the way managers and institutions optimize that work. These are among the key trends shaping the world of the next two decades and beyond, which have been tracked for four decades by Forecasting International Ltd. president Marvin J. Cetron and his long-time collaborator, science writer Owen Davies. This article (and its companion, published in the previous issue) updates the special report published by the World Future Society in 2001. Part II focuses on breakthrough technologies and trends in the workforce, management, and institutions. For each trend, the authors also offer a succinct conclusion about its implications for decision makers. Photograph Fujitsu's new robot for the home, MARON-1, can be remotely controlled by mobile phone to operate home appliances. Equipped with a camera, the home-bot also does sentry duty. // Technology Trends * Technology increasingly dominates both the economy and society. * In all fields, the previous state of the art is being replaced by new high-tech developments at an ever faster rate. * Computers are fast we use for specific tasks. With wireless modems, portable computers give us access to networked data wherever we go. * Mundane commercial and service jobs, environmentally dangerous jobs, and assembly and repair of inaccessible equipment such as undersea cables and space-station components in orbit increasingly will be done by robots. Personal robots will appear in the home by 2010. * Global sales of packaged software are growing at a rate of more than 15% per year. * Wireless links such as satellite -- based telephone systems and Internet connections will simplify relocation of personnel, minimize delays in completing new installations, and let terminals travel with the user instead of forcing the user to seek out the terminal. * By 2005, artificial intelligence, data mining, and virtual reality will help most companies and government agencies to assimilate data and solve problems beyond the range of today's computers. AI's uses include robotics, machine vision, voice recognition, speech synthesis, electronic data processing, health and human services, administration, and airline pilot manufacturing, energy prospecting, automotive diagnostics, medicine, insurance underwriting, and law enforcement. * Superconductors operating at economically viable temperatures will be in commercial use soon after 2015. Products eventually will include supercomputers the size of a three-pound coffee can, electric motors 75% smaller and lighter than those in use today, practical hydrogen-fusion power plants, electrical storage facilities with no heat loss, and noninvasive analyzers that can chart the interaction of individual brain cells. * The engineering, technology, and health industries all will grow rapidly, and many new biotechnology jobs will open up as new developments continue to appear. Implications: New technologies often require a higher level of education and training to use them effectively. They also provide dozens of new opportunities to create businesses and jobs. Automation will continue to cut the cost of many services and products, making it possible to reduce prices while still improving profits. This will be critical to business survival as the Internet pushes the price of most products to the commodity level. New and capture its effluent, a crucial ability in the environmentally conscious future. * Research and development play a growing role in the economy. * R &D; spending is growing most quickly in the fields of information technology, electronics, biotechnology, aerospace, pharmaceuticals, and chemistry. Photograph Researchers examine computergenerated molecular model. Spending on research and development in many technical fields is growing. // * Throughout the 1990s, R &D; outlays rose steadily, ranging between 2.4% and 2.7% of U.S. GDP, and future increases will pace the growth of GDP. * R &D; outlays in Japan have risen almost continuously, to nearly 3% of GDP. In Britain, they have declined as steadily, to less than 1.9% of GDP. In Russia, they fell from about 2% of GDP in 1990 to under 1% in 1997, the most recent year for which figures are available. * Jobs created by high-tech exports are more than replacing those lost to competition under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and similar agreements States. Some 2.9 million American jobs are now supported by exports to NAFTA countries, more than double the number of jobs believed to have been lost from low-tech manufacturing industries. Canada and Mexico report proportionally greater gains. Implications: The demand for scientists, engineers, and technicians will continue to grow, particularly in fields where research promises an immediate business payoff. However, by inhibiting stem-cell research, the United States has made itself a less attractive place for cutting-edge biomedical scientists. The United Kingdom is capitalizing on this to become the world's leader in stem-cell research. In the process, it is reversing the long-standing "brain drain" that deprived it of top scientists. Low-wage countries such as China will continue to take low-wage jobs from advanced industrialized countries such as the United States, but those jobs will be replaced by higher-paid jobs in technology and service industries. Countries like India, China, and Russia will continue to suffer a substantial brain drain as those with high-tech skills emigrate to the United States and adversely affect the economies of the "donor" countries. * Advances in transportation technology will speed travel and shipping, both on land and in the air. * By 2010, New York, Tokyo, and Frankfurt will emerge as transfer points for passengers of high-speed, large-capacity supersonic planes. Photograph Air transport takes off at Zaventem-Brussels Airport, Belgium. Advances in technology will reduce airline crashes and fatalities. // * Airline crashes will decline and will involve fewer fatalities, thanks to such technical advances as safer seat design and flash-resistant fuels. * Following European practice, the U.S. airline industry will begin to replace the spokes of its existing hub-and-spokes system with high -- speed trains for journeys of 100 to 150 miles. * There are more than 500 million cars in the world, and the number is growing quickly. * The average life of a car in the United States is approaching 22 years. * Advances in automobile technology such as road-condition sensors, continuously variable transmissions, automated traffic management systems, night-vision systems passenger's weight will all be in common use by 2010. * The first commercial hybrid gas -- electric cars are available already. New models will begin to win market share from traditional gas guzzlers between 2005 and 2010. * To reduce the number and severity of traffic accidents, trucks on the most heavily used highways will be exiled to car-free lanes, and the separation will be enforced. Implications: One of the fastestgrowing transport industries is trucking, in part because computers encourage "just-in-time" inventory management. Deliveries for Internetbased companies are an expanding market for shipping. This field will grow more efficient as GPS-based truck tracking and other new technologies spread through the industry. More-efficient vehicles, especially with hybrid power trains, should begin to reduce the demand for oil by 2008, easing one of the few remaining sources of inflation. By 2010, "smart car" technologies will begin to reduce deaths due to auto accidents in Europe and, slightly later, the United States. Cities increasingly will struggle to reduce auto congestion Munich, Vienna, and Mexico City-or by encouraging the development and use of mass transit, as in Copenhagen and Curitiba, Brazil. Technology may offer other alternatives. One proposal is "dualmode transportation," in which private cars would be used normally on short hauls but would run on automated guideways for long-distance travel. * The pace of technological change accelerates with each new generation of discoveries and applications. * The design and marketing cycle-idea, invention, innovation, imitation-is shrinking steadily. Thus, products must capture their market quickly, before the competition can copy them. As late as the 1940s, the product cycle stretched to 30 or 40 years. Today, it seldom lasts 30 or 40 weeks. Photograph Projection of lightweight "clean car" model floats overhead at Pacific Northwest Laboratories. Computer -- aided design will accelerate development from idea to design. // * Computer-aided design in the automobile and other industries shortens the lag time between idea and finished design. * Eighty percent of the scientists, engineers, in real time on the Internet. * All the technical knowledge we work with today will represent only 1% of the knowledge that will be available in 2050. Implications: Industries will face much tighter competition based on new technologies. Those who adopt state-of-the-art methods first will prosper. Those who ignore them eventually will fail. * Important medical advances will continue to appear almost daily. * Medical knowledge is doubling every eight years. * Half of what students learn in their freshman year about the cutting edge of science and technology is obsolete, revised, or taken for granted by their senior year. * The Human Genome Project has already begun to yield promising new treatments for genetic disease. Early results include possible cures for hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, familial hypercholesterolemia, a number of cancers, and AIDS. Eventually, some 4,000 hereditary disorders may be prevented or cured through genetic intervention. As many as 300 such treatments are expected to enter clinical testing by 2005. * The discovery that human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) appears among adults) only in cancer cells, seems to promise the development of a generalized "cure for cancer." If early tests pan out, by 2010 or sooner, tumors could be treated routinely and successfully with simple injections in the family doctor's office. * Our growing knowledge of biochemistry, aided by advanced computer modeling, has made it possible to design drugs to fit specific receptors in the cell. Drugs created through this technology often are much more effective than natural derivatives or the products of "synthesize, scan, and hope" methods, and they are much less likely to cause adverse side effects. * By 2005, artificial blood will begin to stretch the supply of blood, which is expected to fall short of demand by 4 million units per year for the next 30 years. * Memory-enhancing drugs should reach clinical use by 2010. * New computer-based diagnostic tools are providing unprecedented images of soft and hard tissues inside the body, eliminating much exploratory surgery. * "Bloodless surgery" using hospital stays, and helping lower medical costs. * "Magic bullet" drug-delivery systems will make it possible to direct enormous doses of medication exactly where they are needed, sparing the rest of the body from possible side effects. This will improve therapeutic results in cancers and many other conditions that require the use of powerful drugs. Laparoscopic and endoscopic surgery are providing similar benefits. * Brain-cell and nerve-tissue transplants to aid victims of retardation, head trauma, and other neurological disorders will enter clinical use by 2005. So will heart repairs using muscles from other parts of the body. Transplanted animal organs will find their way into common use. Laboratory-grown bone, muscle, and blood cells also will be used in transplants. * Other transplanted tissues will come from cloning and related technologies used to grow stem cells. Radical new treatments for diabetes, Parkinson's disease, perhaps Alzheimer's, and many other refractory disorders can be expected to arrive within the next five to 10 years. Whether American physicians will be allowed believes that cloning and related methods will be accepted for the treatment of disease. * Surgeons working via the Internet will routinely operate on patients in remote areas, using robot manipulators. * In the next 10 years, we expect to see more and better bionic limbs, hearts, and other organs; drugs that prevent disease rather than merely treating symptoms; and body monitors that warn of impending trouble. These all will reduce hospital stays. * "Nutraceuticals" and "food -- aceuticals" -nutritional supplements and foods with drugs either added or genetically engineered into them -will be one of the hottest new areas in the health-care industry for the next 20 years. * By 2025, the first nanotechnology-based medical therapies should reach clinical use. Microscopic machines will monitor our internal processes, remove cholesterol plaque from artery walls, and destroy cancer cells before they have a chance to form a tumor. Implications: Even without dramatic advances in life extension, baby boomers are likely to live much longer, and in better health, of health care well below most current projections, but is likely to raise dramatically the cost of Social Security, Medicare, and the few remaining fixed-benefit pension plans. High development and production costs for designer pharmaceuticals, computerized monitors, and artificial organs will continue to push up the cost of health care far more rapidly than the general inflation rate. Much of these expenses will be passed on to Medicare and other third-party payers. Severe personnel shortages can be expected in high-tech medical specialties, in addition to the continuing deficit of nurses. * The Internet is growing logarithmically and globally. * Net users now number around 500 million worldwide; various forecasts put that figure at between 709 million and 946 million by 2005. * One reason for this fast growth is the rapid expansion of Net connectivity in some developing lands. India had only 170,000 Net subscribers in 1998; by mid-2000, it had 1 million, and in 2003, no fewer than 23 million Indians are expected to use the Internet. * China's population of an estimated 33 million users in 2003. * As of mid-2002, some 26 million households in Japan had computers and used them to access the Internet, up from 12.5 million in early 2001. Nearly 60 million people-about half of Japan's population-access the Internet via computers, cell phones, and other devices. * Most Internet communication is commercial, business-to-business, rather than personal e-mail. Photograph Cyber-bar? Interactive Web camera service StellaCam offers an online pub crawl, allowing this beer lover in San Francisco to toast friends in Brussels. // * Internet-based commerce is growing rapidly. Total online consumer sales, excluding auctions, reached $6 billion in July 2002; about half of that went to online travel services. * In 2000, only 500,000 Iranians had access to the Internet. By mid -- 2002, that number was estimated at 1.75 million and was expected to grow to at least 5 million in the next five years. Implications: Americans made up 42% of the total Net-using population in 2000, dropping to less than thanks to B2B sales and services on the Internet: $1.3 trillion by 2002. Total B2B sales on the Net will reach $3.95 trillion in 2003, up from only $403 billion in 2000. Internet-based operations require more sophisticated, knowledgeable workers. Once the current economic downturn is clearly over, people with the right technical training will find a ready market for their services in the next 15 years, as major businesses compete to hire them. Cultural, political, and social isolation has become almost impossible. Even China's attempts to filter the Internet and shield its population from outside influences have proved ineffective, as "hackers" elsewhere provide ways to penetrate the barrier. Similar Iranian efforts have been even less successful. Trends in Labor Force and Work * Education and training are expanding throughout society. * Approximately 130,000 additional K-12 teachers will be needed in the United States between 2000 and 2010, according to the National Center for Educational Statistics. * Also needed: An annual $10 billion increase in federal spending for programs the Job Corps, and the Job Training Partnership Act. * The half-life of an engineer's knowledge today is only five years; in 10 years, 90% of what an engineer knows will be available on the computer. In electronics, fully half of what a student learns as a freshman is obsolete by his or her senior year. * Eighty-five percent of the information in National Institutes of Health computers is upgraded in five years. * Rapid changes in the job market and work-related technologies will necessitate increased training for virtually every worker. * In the next 10 years, close to 10 million jobs will open up for professionals, executives, and technicians in the highly skilled service occupations. * A substantial portion of the labor force will be in job retraining programs at any moment. Much of this will be carried out by current employers, who have come to view employee training as a good investment. * Schools will train both children and adults around the clock. The academic day will stretch to seven remaining free time to prepare for their next job. * We already are seeing a trend toward more adult education. One reason is the need to train for new careers as old ones are displaced or boomers grow bored with them. The other is the need of healthy, energetic people to keep active during retirement. * In the United States, education is moving rapidly to the Internet, as small, rural grammar and high schools supplement their curricula with material from larger institutions, while universities increasingly market their programs to distant students. Implications: Even small businesses must learn to see employee training as an investment rather than an expense. Motorola estimates that it reaps $30 in profits for each dollar it spends on training. Both management and employees must get used to the idea of lifelong learning. It will become a significant part of work life at all levels. As the digital divide is erased and minority and low-income households buy computers and log onto the Internet, groups now disadvantaged will be increasingly able to is spreading throughout industry and the professions. * For doctors, lawyers, engineers, and other professionals, the size of the body of knowledge required to excel in a particular area precludes excellence across all areas. * The same principle applies to artisans. Witness the rise of post-and -- beam homebuilders, old-house restorers, automobile electronics technicians, and mechanics trained to work on only one brand of car. * The information-based organization depends on its teams of task -- focused specialists. * Globalization of the economy calls for the more independent specialists. For hundreds of tasks, corporations will turn to consultants and contractors who specialize more and more narrowly as markets globalize and technologies differentiate. Implications: This trend creates endless new niche markets to be served by small businesses. It also brings more career choices, as old specialties quickly become obsolete, but new ones appear even more rapidly. * Services are the fastest -- growing sector of the global economy. * Retail sales in the United States grew by nearly 41% between The same trend is apparent in other countries. * Service industries accounted for 83% of private nonfarm employment in the United States in 2000, a record 95 million jobs. In the decade ending 2010, services are expected to account for virtually the entire net gain in U.S. employment. * The U.S. health-care budget will more than double from $1.3 trillion in 2000 to $2.8 trillion by 2011, predicts the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. * The service sector employed 70% of the U.S. workforce in 1990; it soon will grow to nearly 90%. Europe and Japan are not far behind. * Service jobs have replaced many of the well-paid positions lost in manufacturing, transportation, and agriculture. These new jobs, often part time, pay half the wages of manufacturing jobs. On the other hand, computer-related service jobs pay much more than the minimum for workers with sound education and training. * Some of the fastest growth is in some of the least-skilled occupations, such as cashiers and retail salespersons. Implications as manufacturing industries have done over the last 20 years. By creating competitive pressure on wages in the industrialized lands, this trend will help to keep inflation in check. The growth of international business will act as a stabilizing force in world affairs, as most countries find that conflict is unacceptably hard on the bottom line. * Women's salaries are beginning to approach equality with men's. * Women's salaries in the United States grew from 61% of men's in 1960 to 74% in 1991. This figure soon will top 83%. In Japan, women's salaries are rising less rapidly, but rising nonetheless. Photograph Women are gaining economic strength. Women's salaries are approaching parity with men's, and competition for the top corporate rung is intensifying. // * In the future, women's average income could exceed men's. College graduates enjoy a significant advantage in earnings over peers whose education ended with high school. Today, some 64% of young American women enroll in college, compared with only 60% of as prestige and corporate value, older women should find it easier to reach upper-management positions. They will strengthen the nascent "old-girl" networks, which will help to raise the pay scale of women still climbing the corporate ladder. Implications: More new hires will be women, and they will expect both pay and opportunities equal to those of men. Competition for top executive positions, once effectively limited to men, will intensify even as the corporate ladder loses many of its rungs. One-fourth of executives today, and nearly 20% of corporate board members, are women. While this is still too few, it is far more than in any previous generation, and their numbers can only grow. * Workers are retiring later as life expectancy stretches. * Data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) show that people are retiring earlier in the developed world, but this is only part of the picture. Americans often return to work and delay complete retirement for several years. This trend will and the number of active workers to support them declines. Photograph Older workers are not jumping ship. As life expectancy increases, expect workers to retire later-and start new careers. // * People increasingly will work at one career, "retire" for a while (perhaps to travel) when they can afford it, return to school, begin another career, and so on in endless variations. True retirement, a permanent end to work, will be delayed until very late in life. * In the long run, it may prove impossible to maintain the tradition of retirement, except through personal savings and investment. * By 2010, we expect the average retirement age in the United States to be delayed well into the 70s. Benefits may also continue their decline, and they will be given based on need, rather than as an entitlement. Implications: Since the penalty on earnings of Social Security recipients has been rescinded, more American retirees will return to work, and those not yet retired will workers will partially make up for the shortage of entry-level employees. The chance to remain in the workplace will reduce the risk of poverty for many elderly people who otherwise would have had to depend on Social Security to get by. Retirees will act as technical aides to teachers, especially in the sciences. * Unions are losing their power. * In the United States, unions enrolled 23% of employed wage and salary workers in 1980, but only 16% by 1995. By 2005, despite several recent successes in organizing, contract negotiations, and strikes, it will fall under 12%. * In South Korea, where organized labor once was invincible, the government has increasingly stood up to strikes by doctors, electrical workers, car makers, and other trade groups. * In Britain, where the Thatcher government broke union power in the 1980s, labor has recovered little of its former strength. * One reason for this decline is that jobs now are free to move around the globe from heavily unionized areas to regions a growing proportion of business activities to nonunion firms. * Another reason is that the increased use of robots, CAD/CAM, and flexible manufacturing complexes can cut a company's workforce by up to one-third. The surviving workers tend to be technicians and other comparatively well -- educated semiprofessionals, who always have tended to resist union membership. The growing industrial use of artificial intelligence will further this trend. * A third reason is the high cost of strikes. The once-wealthy Teamsters Union spent an estimated $15 million on its strike against UPS in 1997, leaving only $700,000 in its coffers -- this after substantial borrowing from the AFL-CIO. In 2002, they settled without a strike. * In 10 to 15 years, American labor unions will compete with AARP to lead the battle for the rights of latelife workers and for secure retirement benefits. They face an inherent conflict between the interests of workers in what once would have been the retirement years and those of younger members, who rightly see the elderly as having saddled them Implications: For large companies, this promises greater stability in employee wages and benefits. Unions eager to regain their membership will target any substantial firm with less-skilled employees to organize. This could raise labor costs for companies that unions once would have considered too small to organize. Democrats have been losing support from unions as organized labor declines. However, the three groups replacing unions in the power bloc -- the AARP, Hispanics, and African Americans-also have tended to vote Democratic. The old paradigm of unions vs. corporations is obsolete. In today's economy, workers negotiate alongside management, winning shared bonuses. * Second and third careers are becoming common, as more people make mid-life changes in occupation. * The fast pace of technological change makes old careers obsolete, even as new ones open up to replace them. * People change careers every 10 years, on average. * A recent Louis Harris poll found that only 39% of workers say they intend to hold the same job five years from now; 31% do not know. * Boomers and their children will have not just two or three careers, but five or six, as dying industries are replaced by new opportunities. Implications: "Earn while you learn" takes on new meaning: Most people will have to study for their next occupation, even as they pursue their current career. In many two-earner couples, one member or the other will often take a sabbatical to prepare for a new career. Self-employment is becoming an increasingly attractive option, as being your own boss makes it easier to set aside time for career development. This is especially true for generations X and dot-com. Retirement plans must be revised, so that workers can transfer medical and pension benefits from one career to the next-a change that has long been needed. * The work ethic is vanishing. * Tardiness is increasing; sick -- leave abuse is common. * Job security and high pay are not the motivators they once were, because social mobility is high and people seek job Louis Harris poll said they work because it "gives a feeling of real accomplishment." * Gen X'ers watched their parents remain loyal to their employers, only to be downsized out of work. As a result, they have no corporate loyalty at all. Many will quit their job at even the hint of a better position. * For generation X, the post-babyboom generation, work is only a means to their ends: money, fun, and leisure. * Fifty-five percent of the top executives interviewed in the poll say that erosion of the work ethic will have a major negative effect on corporate performance in the future. * Ethics at the top are no better: Enron, WorldCom, Tyco International, Adelphia Cable, and ImClone just begin the list of companies under investigation for deceptive accounting practices, looting of corporate assets, and other misdeeds with dire implications for stock values. * Seeking the root of such problems, a Zogby International poll of college seniors found that 97% said their studies had prepared 73% said professors had taught them that right and wrong are not susceptible to uniform standards, but depend on individual values and cultural norms. Implications: The new generation of workers can not simply be hired and ignored. They must be nurtured, paid well, and made to feel appreciated. Training is crucial. Without the opportunity to learn new skills, young people will quickly find a job that will help them to prepare for the rest of their career. * Two-income couples are becoming the norm. * In 75% of U.S. households, both partners will work full time by the year 2005, up from 63% in 1992. Photograph Women of working age are working more. Look for a growing demand for family-friendly workplace policies, as well as working couples switching breadwinner roles back and forth. // * The percentage of working-age women who are employed has grown steadily throughout the industrialized world. In the United States, it's grown from 46% in 1970 to 68.8% in 2000. The lowest are Italy, women employed, according to the OECD. * Look for families that usually have two incomes, but have frequent intervals in which one member takes a sabbatical or goes back to school to prepare for another career. As information technologies render former occupations obsolete, this will become the new norm. * This emphasis on work is one big reason the richest 25% to 50% of the U.S. population has reached zero population growth. They have no time for children and little interest in having large families. Implications: Demand for on-the -- job child care, extended parental leave, and other family-oriented benefits can only grow. In the long run, this could erode the profitability of some American companies, unless it is matched by an equal growth in productivity. Two-career couples can afford to eat out often, take frequent short vacations, and buy new cars and other such goods. And they feel they deserve whatever time-savers and outright luxuries they can afford. This is quickly expanding the market for consumer goods and services, and entrepreneurialism, as one family member's salary can tide them over while the other works to establish a new business. * Generations X and dot-com will have major effects in the future. * Members of generation X, now in their 30s, and especially of generation dot-com, now in their 20s, have more in common with their peers throughout the world than with their parents' generation. * There are approximately 50 million people in Europe between the ages of 15 and 24; 30 million more are between 25 and 29. The under-30 cohort represents about 22% of the European population. * The under-20 cohort is remaining in school longer and taking longer to enter the workforce than before. * Generation X should be renamed "generation E," for entrepreneurial. Throughout the world, they are starting new businesses at an unprecedented rate. * The younger dot-com generation is proving to be even more businessoriented, caring for little but the bottom line. Twice as many say they would prefer to own a more would prefer to own a business rather than hold a key position in politics or government. * Many in generation X are economically conservative. On average, those who can do so begin saving much earlier in life than their parents did in order to protect themselves against unexpected adversity. They made money in the stock market boom of the 1990s, then lost it in the "dot-bomb" contraction, but have left their money in the market. For generations X and dot-com, time is still on their side. Implications: Employers will have to adjust virtually all of their policies and practices to the values of these new and different generations, including finding new ways to motivate and reward them. Generations X and dot-com thrive on challenge, opportunity, and training-whatever will best prepare them for their next career move. Cash is just the beginning of what they expect. For these generations, lifelong learning is nothing new; it's just the way life is. Companies that can provide diverse, cutting-edge training fewer opportunities to improve their skills and knowledge base. Generations X and dot-com are well equipped for work in an increasingly high-tech world, but have little interest in their employers' needs. They also have a powerful urge to do things their way. As both customers and employees, they will demand even more advanced telecommunications and Net-based transactions. * Time is becoming the world's most precious commodity. * Computers, electronic communications, the Internet, and other technologies are making national and international economies much more competitive. Photograph Time is becoming ever more precious. Stress-related problems may increasingly cut into companies' productivity. // * In the United States, workers spend about 10% more time on the job than they did a decade ago. European executives and nonunionized workers face the same trend. * In this high-pressure environment, single workers and two-income couples are increasingly desperate for any product that offers to simplify their lives or grant them a taste of luxury-and they can afford to buy it. Implications: Stress-related problems affecting must help employees balance their time at work with their family lives and need for leisure. As time for shopping continues to evaporate, Internet and mail-order marketers will have a growing advantage over traditional stores. Management Trends * More entrepreneurs start new businesses every year. * Workers under 30 would prefer to start their own company, rather than advance through the corporate ranks. Some 10% are actively trying to start their own businesses, three times as many as in previous generations. Photograph Self-employment is the work option of choice for growing numbers of younger workers. // * A large majority simply distrust large institutions. Most believe that jobs can not provide a secure economic future in a time of rapid technological change. Examples of Silicon Valley start-ups that turned their founders into billionaires "overnight" dramatically advanced this change of values. This attitude seems to have been moderated only slightly by the failure of many dot-com companies. * By 2006, the number of self -- employed people in the United States will rise to 10.2 However, Forecasting International believes that figure to be too low: Expect closer to 12 million self-employed Americans in 2006. * More women also are starting small businesses. Many are leaving traditional jobs to go home and open businesses, even as they begin a family. * Since the 1970s, small businesses started by entrepreneurs have accounted for nearly all of the new jobs created. For much of this period, giant corporations have actually cut employment. In 1995, small, entrepreneurial businesses produced 1 million new full-time jobs vs. barely 100,000 among larger companies. * By 2005, 80% of the labor force will be working for firms employing fewer than 200 people. Implications: This is a self-perpetuating trend, as all those new service firms need other companies to handle chores outside their core business. It is driven as well by the attitudes and values of generations X and dotcom and by the rapid developments in technology, which create endless opportunities for new business development. Specialty boutiques will continue to spring up on the Internet organizations are quickly displacing the old command-and-control model of management. * The typical large business is struggling to reshape itself. Soon, it will be composed of specialists who rely on information from colleagues, customers, and headquarters to guide their actions. * Management styles will change as upper executives learn to consult these skilled workers on a wide variety of issues. Employees will gain new power with the authority to make decisions based on the data they develop. * Information-based organizations require more specialists, who will be found in operations, not at corporate headquarters. R &D,; manufacturing, and marketing specialists will work together as a team on all stages of product development rather than keeping each stage separate and distinct. * Upper management will no longer give detailed orders to subordinates. Instead, it will set performance expectations for the organization, its parts, and its specialists and supply the feedback necessary to determine whether results have met expectations. Implications: This is a wellestablished trend. At this point, many large corporations have others still have a long way to go. Downsizing has spread from manufacturing industries to the service economy. Again, this process encourages the entrepreneurial trend, both to provide services for companies outsourcing their secondary functions and to provide jobs for displaced employees. Many older workers have been displaced in this process, depriving companies of their corporate memory. Companies have replaced them with younger workers, whose experience of hard times is limited to the relatively mild recession since 2000. Many firms may discover that they need to recruit older workers to help them adapt to adversity. * A typical large business in 2010 will have fewer than half the management levels of its counterpart in 1990, and about one-third the number of managers. * Computers and information -- management systems have stretched the manager's effective span of control from six to 21 subordinates. Information now flows from front-line workers to higher management for analysis. Thus, fewer mid-level managers are needed, flattening the corporate pyramid. * Downsizing, restructuring, reorganization, outsourcing, Opportunities for advancement will be few because they will come within the narrow specialty. By 2001, only one person for every 50 was promoted, compared with one for every 20 in 1987. * Information-based organizations will have to make a special effort to prepare professional specialists to become business executives and leaders. Implications: Top managers will have to be computer-literate to retain their jobs and must make sure they achieve the increased span of control that computers make possible. Finding top managers with the broad experience needed to run a major business already has become difficult and can only grow more so as the demand for specialization grows. Executives increasingly will start their own companies, rather than trusting the old-fashioned corporate career path to provide advancement. * Government regulations will continue to take up a growing portion of the manager's time and effort. * Since the U.S. Congress passed regulatory reform laws in 1996, more than 14,000 new regulations have been enacted. Not one proposed regulation was rejected during this period. The Federal Register, where larger in 1998 than it had been 10 years earlier-50,000 pages in all. Photograph Hemicycle of the European Parliament, Brussels, where legislators are churning out regulations at a pace matching their U.S. counterparts. // * This is not solely an American trend. The Brussels bureaucrats of the European Union are churning out regulations at an even faster rate, overlaying a standard regulatory structure on all the national systems of the member countries. Implications: Regulations-though both necessary and unavoidable -- amount to a kind of friction that slows both current business and future economic growth. Their proliferation in the developed world could give a competitive advantage to countries such as India and China, where regulations governing investment and capital flow are being stripped away, while health, occupational safety, and environmental codes are still rudimentary or absent. Other lands, such as Russia, will remain at a competitive disadvantage until they can pass and enforce the regulations needed to ensure a stable, fair business environment. Institutional Trends * Multinational corporations are uniting the world-and growing parts for well over half of the products built in the United States will originate in other countries. * Multinational corporations that rely on indigenous workers may be hindered by the increasing number of AIDS cases in Africa and around the world. Up to 90% of the population in parts of sub-Saharan Africa reportedly tests positive for the HIV virus in some surveys. Thailand is equally stricken, and many other parts of Asia show signs that the AIDS epidemic is spreading among their populations. * The continuing fragmentation of the post-Cold War world has reduced the stability of some lands where government formerly could guarantee a favorable-or at least predictable-business environment. The current unrest in Indonesia is one example. * One risk now declining is the threat of currency fluctuations. In Europe, at least, the adoption of the euro is making for a more stable economic environment. Implications: It is becoming ever more difficult for business to be confident that decisions about plant location, marketing, and other critical issues will continue to appear wise even five an even greater margin for risk management. This will encourage outsourcing, rather than investment in offshore facilities that could be endangered by sudden changes in business conditions. Countries that can demonstrate a significant likelihood of stability will enjoy a strong competitive advantage over neighbors that can not. Witness the rapid growth of investment in India now that deregulation and privatization have general political support, compared with other Asian lands where conditions are less predictable. Major corporations also can help to moderate some risks in unstable countries, such as by threatening to take their business elsewhere. * This international exposure includes a greater risk of terrorist attack. * State-sponsored terrorism appears to be on the decline, as tougher sanctions make it more trouble than it is worth. However, some rogue states may still provide logistical or technological support for independent terrorist organizations when opportunities present themselves. Photograph Euro currency gets action in the market. Eliminating risks caused by currency fluctuations, Europe may become a more stable economic environment. // * Thus far, attacks on McDonalds, occasional bombings of bank branches and of American-owned pipelines in South America, and kidnappings. * But if American government facilities overseas are effectively hardened against terrorist assault, corporate facilities are likely to be attacked instead. * Nothing will prevent small, local political organizations and specialinterest groups from using terror to promote their causes. * However, as the United States has just recognized, the most dangerous terrorist groups are no longer motivated by specific political goals, but by generalized, virulent hatred based on religion and culture. * On balance, the amount of terrorist activity in the world is likely to go up, not down, in the next 10 years. * Risks of terrorism are greatest in countries with repressive governments and large numbers of unemployed, educated young men. Implications: Western corporations may have to devote more of their resources to selfdefense, while accepting smaller -- than-expected profits from operations in the developing countries. Like the attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, and the American embassies in corporate facilities are likely to be designed for maximum destruction and casualties. Bloodshed for bloodshed's sake has become a characteristic of modern terrorism. Where terrorism is most common, countries will find it impossible to attract foreign investment, no matter how attractive their resources. Though Islamic terrorists form only a tiny part of the Muslim community, they have a large potential for disruption throughout the region from Turkey to the Philippines. Although al Qaeda has demonstrated its ability to wreak havoc halfway across the world, the risks are greatest in the oil-rich Arab countries, where Islamic extremists have highjacked the faith and few who cling to traditions of peace and tolerance dare to speak out against them. * Consumers increasingly demand social responsibility from companies and each other. * Companies increasingly will be judged on how they treat the environment. For example, nuclear power plant controversies are now seen in the light of the Chernobyl nuclear accident. * Safety testing of children's products also enforces corporate responsibility. One company recently was forced to recall Government intervention will supplant deregulation in the airline industry (in the interest of safety and services), financial services (to control instability and costs), electric utilities (nuclear problems), and the chemical industry (toxic wastes). * With 5% of the world's population and 66% of the lawyers on the planet, American citizens will not hesitate to litigate if their demands are not met. Implications: For industry, this represents one more powerful pressure to adopt environmentally friendly technologies, to work with area schools and community groups, and to participate in other local activities. It also represents an opportunity to market to environmentally concerned consumers. As the Internet spreads Western attitudes throughout the world, environmental activists in other regions will find ways to use local court systems to promote their goals. Litigation is likely to become a global risk for companies that do not make the environment a priority * On average, institutions are growing more transparent in their operations and more accountable for their misdeeds. * China, nations, was forced to open many of its records as a precondition for joining the World Trade Organization. * In India, a country generally regarded as one of the world's most corrupt, the Central Vigilance Commission has opened the country's banking system to more-effective oversight. * In the United States, powerful forces are inspiring demands for greater transparency and accountability in large institutions. These include both the current wave of business scandals and the controversy over child abuse within the Catholic Church. * The wave of support for government since the September 11 terrorist attacks has made Americans willing to accept greater transparency-that is, less privacy-in their personal lives. // Corruption and opacity rankings of selected countries based on the clarity of accepted accounting and regulatory practices. // * At the same time, in a countertrend that may prove temporary, the nationalist response to September 11 appears to have muted most demands for transparency in the American government. * Wars against terrorism, drug trafficking, and money laundering are opening the world's money the operations of nongovernmental organizations that function primarily as charitable and social-service agencies but are linked to terrorism as well. Implications: Countries with high levels of transparency tend to be much more stable than more-opaque lands. They also tend to be much more prosperous, in part because they find it easier to attract foreign investment. Greater transparency seems likely to reduce the operational effectiveness of the world's drug traffickers and terrorist organizations. * Institutions are undergoing a bimodal distribution: The big get bigger, the small survive, and the midsized are squeezed out. * By 2005, 20 major automakers around the world will hold market shares ranging from 18% (GM) to 1% (BMW). By 2010, there will be only five giant automobile firms. Production and assembly will be centered in Korea, Italy, and Latin America. * By 2005, just three major corporations will make up the computer hardware industry: IBM, Compaq, and Dell. * Seven domestic airlines in the United States today control 80% only 20%. The most recent consolidation is the alliance between Continental and Northwest. By 2005 there will be only three major domestic carriers. * Where local regulations allow, mergers and acquisitions are an international game. Witness the takeover of Chrysler by Daimler -- Benz. The continuing removal of trade barriers among EU nations will keep this trend active for at least the next decade. * Manufacturers often sell directly to the dealer, skipping the wholesaler or distributor. * We are now in the second decade of the microsegmentation trend, as more and more highly specialized businesses and entrepreneurs search for narrower niches. These small firms will prosper, even as mid-sized, "plain vanilla" competitors die out. This trend extends to nearly every endeavor, from retail to agriculture. * This trend leads us to believe that AT &T; may be reconsolidated by 2010. * "Boutique" businesses that provide entertainment, financial planning, and preventive medical care for aging baby boomers will be among the fastest-growing segments of the U.S. economy. regional, often family-owned companies have been relatively exempt from the consolidation now transforming many other businesses. Takeovers are likely even in these industries in the next decade. This consolidation will extend even to Internet-based businesses, where well-financed companies will try to absorb or out-compete tiny online start-ups, much as they have done in the brick-and-mortar world. No company is too large to be a takeover target if it dominates a profitable market or has other features attractive to profit-hungry investors. Photograph Cetron Davies Author Affiliation About the Authors Author Affiliation Marvin J. Cetron is president of Forecasting International Ltd. in Virginia. His e-mail address is marglo@tili.com. Owen Davies is a former senior editor at Omni magazine and is a freelance writer specializing in science, technology, and the future. This article is excerpted from their special report, "50 Trends Shaping the Future," published by the World Future Society and available for $8 each ($7.20 for Society members), cat. no. R-2428. Order online from the Futurist Bookstore, https: The distinctions between technical innovations and the aestheticization of form in lathe-turning are beginning to fray, to judge from "Challenge V," the traveling exhibition organized the rough the nonprofit Wood Turning Center. Preponderant in the show of 68 works -- by 55 artists from seven countries -- are wood and metal objects with a curious hybrid look. They derive equally from imagination and process, and comment on functional and aesthetic form through contrasting elements. This can be seen in a comparison of Virginia Dotson's Light Show, 1993, with Mike Shuler's Madagoscar Rosewood Bowl #692, 1993, both wooden bowls. Light Show contrasts white and black spirals of laminated wood with each other and with spiral, pointed openings-actual splits-in the bowl. In Shuler's work, the designs formed by intersecting spirals of rare woods internalize the light and dark elements into brilliant accents; the splits occur in the laminated segments that are assembled into the final pattern. Other works use the concavity of the form as a stage, a space for events. Crow Pond, 1993, by Neil by Michael Kehs depict, respectively, birds on the shallow of a dried pond, and bats exiting the enclosure of a cave. No longer a self-contained entity, the bowl has become, in these instances, a setting for other beings to inhabit, an element in an assemblage. And this exposes one of the curious unifying aspects of "Challenge as much as these works claim an identity as turned objects, they also take on the nature of assembled objects. The most obviously assembled pieces, which also are some of the most whimsical, nonetheless retain a strong rotational form. The two figurative components of Laura Marth's Sweet Dreams, 1993, of anodized aluminum, are confectionary and surreal, alluring because they are split off from the real world by the peculiarity of their coloring, and their hybrid, alien nature as odd cartoon-like creatures. The works of Steve Loar, Charles and Tami Kegley, Mark Allen Blaustein and Stephen Hughes inhabit similar worlds. Finally, there are several reticent yet singular pieces difficult to categorize. They share the qualities discussed above, i.e., they are often segmented or assembled. And they comment on functional turned form and sculptural form, but seem to be both and neither. They are surreal yet concrete. Hans Joachim Weissflog's delightful Saturn "Damaris Cortes" and Drunken Box, 1993, belong to a world separate from us, but familiar. Richard Hooper's Untitled, 1990, is an idea made solid by careful additions and subtractions. Frank E. Cummings's Passion Fire, 1993, is both flesh and wood, alive and inert. Philip Moulthrop's White Pine Mosaic Bowl, 1993 -- concentric rings of wood embedded in black epoxy and turned into a bowl -- contains and separates ideas of growth, dissolution and continuance. Jon Sauer's Zig Zag Bottle, 1993, twists through an eccentric motion of its own logic. Connie Mississippi's Sacred Sexuality, 1992, parallels organic growth and the growth of form through lamination and lathe turning, becoming a symbol of generative which brings us back to where we began -- reveals surface, depth and process through its internal assemblage. "Challenge V: International Lathe-Turned Objects" is at the Fine Arts Museum of the South, Mobile, Alabama (April 22-June 12), and will travel to the California Crafts Museum, San Francisco, California (August 1-September 29), and seven other venues through January 1997. A 74-page catalogue, edited by Albert B. LeCoff, with artist and selection committee statements and 71 color photographs, is available for $22 (including shipping) from the Wood Turning Center, P.O. Box 25706, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19144. Tom Csaszar, an artist and writer based in Philadelphia, contributes to New Art Examiner, Sculpture and Art in America.
The George R. Gardiner Museum of Ceramic Art, Toronto, is the concluding venue for the exhibition "White on White," featuring works by 20 contemporary Canadian ceramists. Originated by the Canadian Clay and Glass Gallery, Waterloo, Ontario, the show toured to five cities in the Far East prior to opening at the Gardiner (there through February 8, 1998). In this excerpt from the catalogue, curators Anne McPherson and Susan Jefferies discuss the fascination with whiteness that has held potters of many lands and historical eras. // White is the absence of color, the sum of all colors. It brings to clay meanings both inherent and external to it: the notions of emptiness, purity, simplicity, nakedness, lightness, newness, spirituality, death and transcendence. The artist who chooses to work with these meanings may elaborate on them, abstract from them or confound them. While some artists in this exhibition subscribe to the dictum that a work of art... "shouLd not mean but be," others have given their work conceptual. During several expansive periods of ceramic history, the quest for a workable white cLay body with a cLear or white covering engaged potters in many parts of the worLd. PorceLain, with its strengths and translucency, was first produced in southern China during the T'ang Dynasty in the Late eighth or earLy ninth century. It took Europeans untiL the earLy 18th century to master the difficulties of a porcellanous clay body and the technology of high-fired kilns. Adding a clear glaze to porcelain highlighted its reflective quality and depth. Photograph RIGHT TOP TO BOTTOM: JOHN CHALKE (Calgary, Alberta) -Twinned Form with Gazebo Style Top, 1996, earthenware, handbuilt, 7 by 2 inches; DIANE NASR (Kleinburg, Ontario) -Untitled (screen), 1995, porcelain, handbuilt, 14 3/4 by 15 1/2 inches; JIM THOMSON (Ottawa, Ontario) -Boboli, 1995, stoneware, multi-fired, 18 3/4 by 15 1/2 inches; ANN ROBERTS (Conestogo, Ontario) Goddess Table, 1995, white earthenware, slips inches. OPPOSITE PAGE TOP: ANN MORTIMER (Newmarket, Ontario) -Iced Tea Series, #1, 1995, handbuilt, low fire, glazes, luster, 3 by 6 1/4 by 6 1/4 inches. BOTTOM: PAUL MATHIEU (Montreal, Quebec) - The will to nothingness (La volonte de neant), 1995, porcelain, 7 3/4 by 17 1/2 by 17 1/2 inches. // Throughout ceramic history and in alL parts of the worLd, attempts have been made to produce an attractive covering to make decoration vivid and successful. In Korea in the 15th century, white sLips and glazes of ravishing beauty were produced on Punching wares. In Europe slips (Liquid cLay used as a glaze) tended to give a yellower hue because of trace eLements in the cLay. In the Islamic world tin oxide was added to a Lead gLaze, producing a suitable white covering for decoration on earthenware. This innovation made its way across Europe. In Italy, where these wares are called maiolica, potters to produce different shades of white and to decorate their wares with the sophisticated interplay of white on white, caLled bianco sopra bianco. Low-fired wares such as majolica have had many revivaLs since those great early Islamic pots were made, and seem to have been of particular interest in the West following less colorful, nondecorative periods of production. Tin has often been replaced by other materiaLs, and sometimes the gLossy white glaze is not decorated at all, but Left exposed over the clay. The preoccupation with white has never waned. In England in the 20th century Lucie Rie developed a trademark thick white glaze for her functional wares and a forceful, exploding white gLaze for vases. Hans Coper spent virtualLy his entire Life refining, layering and scratching through white glazes. OnLy rareLy did he feel the need to venture beyond an exploration of white tones. Gordon Baldwin and Ewen Henderson have continued this tradition of working almost exclusively in white. In Japan Ryoji Koie uses white in ways that are reminiscent of the traditional, Kitamura's exquisite white inlay work recalls raked Zen gardens or ancient textiLes. The Canadian artists exhibiting here have made their contributions to this white-on-white tradition with porcelains, white glazes and clear glazes of great beauty, with earthenware pieces of dignity and imagination, with natural and architectonic stoneware .... They have shown the confidence, ability and sensitivity to pay their debt to the past through work and study, but have never been slavishly committed to it. They realize that to try and recreate an object situated at a different point in history will only be a half truth, as its cultural context and vigor have been lost. In addition to the artists whose works are illustrated here, the exhibition included Robert Archambeau, Roseline Delisle, Sadashi Inuzuka, Kayo O'Young, Lisette Savaria and Francois Potvin, and Bruce Taylor. A 32-page catalogue in English and French, with 19 color photographs, biographical notes and exhibition checklist, is available for $12 from the George R. Gardiner Museum of Ceramic Art, 111 Queen's Park, RIGHT TOP TO BOTTOM: LEOPOLD FOULEM (Montreal, Quebec) -Hand Made Hare, 1995, ceramic, mixed media, 10 by 4 1/2 by 4 inches; GREG PAYCE (Calgary, Alberta) Garniture, 1995, red earthenware, wheelthrown, white slip, white terra sigillata, 6 3/4 by 22 1/2 by 7 3/4 inches; HARLAN HOUSE (Marysville, Ontario) -Untitled (vase), 1995, porcelain, wheel-thrown, march crackle, xue bai glaze, sgraffiti, 15 1/2 by 9 inches; WALTER OSTROM (Halifax, Nova Scotia) -Heaven and Earth Vase, 1996, earthenware, mold-made, maiolica and porcelain decoration, 4 3/4 by 23 1/2 by 11 3/4 inChes. OPPOSITE PAGE TOP TO BOTTOM: BRUCE COCHRANE (Toronto, Ontario) -Cruet Set 1995, porcelain, thrown, altered, 9 3/4 by 11 3/4 by 5 inches; STEVE HEINEMANN (Toronto, Ontario) -Untitled, 1996, earthenware, slips, glazes, multiple-fired, 4 1/2 by 16 1/3 by 7 inches, Jack White, 1995, porcelain, oxide, 22 1/2 by 19 1/2 inches. //
// RENWICK GALLERY, SMITHSONIAN AMERICAN ART MUSEUM / WASHINGTON, DC MARCH 31-AUGUST 20,2000 It is always a potential cause for celebration when a new program gets launched, particularly at the national level, where it can attract the attention of the public and the cognoscenti alike. "The Renwick Invitational: Five Women in Craft" inaugurated a biennial series dedicated to exploring "the many facets of American craft," according to Kenneth Trapp, the Renwick's curator-in-charge. This first exhibition featured the basketry of Mary Jackson, the carved porcelain and wood objects of Jane Jacobson, the metalwork of Myra Mimlitsch Gray, the jewelry of Sondra Sherman and the fiber work of Consuelo Jimenez Underwood. The show's focus on five artists allowed for relative depth, and it was possible to note a strong conceptual break between Jackson and Jacobson, who expand the conventions of their fields, and Gray, Sherman and Underwood, who subvert theirs. Yet certain commonalities brought cohesion. All the artists emphasize a personal connection to their art making and explore the metaphoric possibilities of their imagery, from South Carolina, honors the traditional basketry techniques and designs of her African-American forebears with materials found in nature. Each basket represents a search for personal discovery and growth and is likely to induce a trancelike state in the viewer. While her deceptively simple baskets retain their functionality, subtle transformations turn them into complex sculptures. In Open Vessel with Sweet Grass Spray, 1997, a strand of sweet grass breaks out of a coil, extending outward in a sweeping flourish. In other works, she elongates the handles, flattens the vessel or adds French knots as accents. Jacobson has devoted much of the last five years to exploring the Japanese netsuke tradition. Her deftly sculpted objects, inspired by her native rural Minnesota, capture ephemeral moments in nature. In Daylily and Snowy Tree Cricket, 1996, the diminutive scene is exquisitely rendered, the staccato carving of the insect alighting contrasting with the smoother, more sensual treatment of the flower. As with haiku poetry, a sense of effortless spontaneity masks a labor-intensive process at SUNY New Paltz, utility is neutralized and becomes the basis for her critique of traditional luxury tableware. By encasing such household items as a sugar bowl and creamer, or framinga silver-plated spoon split into scissors, Gray encourages the viewer to probe her transmutations with the mind as well as the senses. While commenting on the daily rituals assigned to women -who often have been deemed possessions themselves-Gray draws attention to the beauty intrinsic to her found objects. Equally radical in its reinterpretation of tradition is the narrative jewelry by Sherman, from Rhode Island, in which the promise of corporeal stimulation leads to intellectual awakening. Her wide-ranging references include nature, as evidenced in shimmering waterfall necklaces of gold, silver, garnets and glass beads. Other works address gender issues and the vicissitudes of love. Venus and Cupid, 1991-93, counterposes two contrasting pendants with a copy of a Northern Renaissance portrait of the mythological pair, all set in a sensual and sophisticated box. Underwood, a Californian, takes on a field dominated by the conflicting identity of hyphenated Americans and their invisibility in the eyes of the general population. At times this strident message nearly overwhelms the aesthetics of her atmospheric pictorial weavings. In the layered Virgen de los Caminos, 1994, barbed wire and caution signs associated with border crossings suggest issues of separation and exclusion, while images of the Virgin Mary and floral patterns underscore the strength of the artist's Latino heritage. Laying the foundation for subsequent successes, "Five Women in Craft" was challenging, though at times it seemed disjointed, given the range in sensibility and association of the artists, and an installation that grouped their works inconsistently. Yet each body of work possessed tremendous vitality, paving the way to a larger awareness of what craft is today and what it can be in the future. -SARAH TANGUY We invite submissions to "Gallery," a timely pictorial survey of exhibitions. Submissions must include: a press release from the sponsor giving show title, opening/closing dates, artist participants/media and show itinerary together different works in the exhibition, fully identified. Please include a catalog if published. Stamped envelope required for return of visuals. January 29 is the deadline for the April/May 2001 issue. Shows ending before December 30 are not eligible. 1 Philadelphia International Airport Terminal D (Pennsylvania, solo exhibition, Aug. 21- Jan. 26) - Monkey with Vines, 1999, ceramic, glaze, underglaze, china paint, handbuilt, 36 by 48 by 30 inches, among five works. 2 Kennedy Galleries (New York City, solo exhibition, Nov. 15 -- Dec. 23) - Miss Flite's Birds, 1999, mixed media, silver, slate, 19th-century goldfinch egg, 18k and 20k gold, coral, bone malachite, brooch 2 3/4 by 2 1/4 inches, mount 15 by 12 3/8 inches, among 28 works by the British goldsmith. 3 National Ornamental Metal Museum (Memphis, TN, solo exhibition, Oct. 1 - Nov. 26) -- Brooch, 1998-2000, 18k yellow gold, palladium, chased by 5/8 by 9/16 inches, in a 23-year retrospective. 4 Arc Gallery (Chicago, IL, solo exhibition, Jan. 3-27) - Traveler 1, 2000, Divers and Travelers series, blown, slumped and fused glass, copper, brass, steel mesh, 28 by 22 inches, among 12 works. Photo/Bruce Miller. 5 Schmidt Dean Gallery (Philadelphia, PA, solo exhibition, Oct. 2o-NOV. 25) Tree Carpet Project: Boy in Diapers, 1998, limewood, carved, oil paint, 15'' /2bY 7 b 7 inches, among 17 works based on a textile in the collection of the Philadelphia Museum of Art. Photo/John Woodin. 1 Photograph // Snyderman Gallery (Philadelphia, PA, solo exhibition, Sept. 1-30) Honey the Clown, 1999, stained glass, 19 by 21 inches, among 12 works. 2 Museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology (New York City, solo exhibition, Sept. 19-jan. 6) -Poncho, 1965, wool with suede trim, metal toggles, and in a retrospective of 170 pieces, dating from 1923 to i98o, by the designer, who died this year. Photo/Irving Soero. 3 Marta Hewett Gallery (Cincinnati, OH, Aug. 19Sept. 30) -Deux Petits Songes, 2000, glass, 6 by 4 inches, in "The Year of Young Glass," an international juried competition for artists under 30. Catalog: 13 pages, $lo, 513-421-7883. 4 e.r.I. originals (WinstonSalem, NC, Sept. 8-Oct. 18) -Rainbow Visage, 2000, ceramic, black Slip, 25 by 6 inches, and paintings by Jim Chapman. 5 Tacoma Art Museum (Washington, Sept. 21-Jan. i) Visual Aspects, 1999, set of nine brooch/box pairs, mixed media, each box 4 by 4 by 3 inches, in "Under the Influence: Northwest jewelry and Ethnographic Objects," one of 12 exhibitions in "Metal-Urge: Tacoma's Celebration of the Metal Arts." 1 Photograph Photograph // Whatcom Museum of History and Art (Bellingham, WA, July 7-Sept. raffia, 16 by 17 by 4 inches, in the "Northwest International Art Competition Exhibition." Photo/Roger Schreiber. 2 Spertus Institute of Jewish Studies Spertus Museum (Chicago, IL, Sept. 24-Feb. ii) - Torah Covering, 2000, silk, vintage linens, beads, Plexiglas, 3o0/2 by 81/8 inches, in "Judging the Book by Its Cover: Torah Coverings from the Philip &; Sylvia Spertus Judaica Prize Competition," among 18 works. Photo/Tom Nowak. Catalog: 56 pages, $19.95, 312-322-1740. 3 Brandywine River Museum (Chadds Ford, PA, Sept. 9Nov. 19) -- Jimmy Who, ca. 1976, polyester, cotton, pieced, appliqued, embroidered, 5oJ/2 by 433/4 inches, in "The Fabric of Persuasion: Two Hundred Years of Political Quilts." Catalog: 40 pages, $12.95, 610-3882700. 4 Shemer Art Center (Phoenix, AZ, Aug. 15-Sept. 8) Anemone, 2000, lacewood, Baltic birch, carved, 12 by 20 by 20 inches, in "Wood You Believe artists. 5 iMagnifico! Artspace (Albuquerque, NM, Nov. lo-Dec. 8) -Seven Plus One, 1998, linden wood, cocobolo, carved, lacquer, 16 by 36 by 7 inches, in" Momento Mori: Contemporary Still Life, "and paintings by Robert Peterson and John Rise. Catalog: 44 pages, $11, 505-343-1178. 1 Ohio Craft Museum (Columbus, Nov. 12-Jan. 14) -Eve's Slippers, 1999, copper, fold -- formed, soldered, 6 by io0/2 by 5 inches, in an exhibition of clothing by 18 artists. 2 Sybaris Gallery (Royal Oak, MI, Dec. 9-jan. 13) -Mother, 2000, waxed linen, antique buttons, gourd, photo -- transfer, bamboo and silver beads, 13V/2 by 9 by 5 inches, in "Figurative Suggestions: Woven, Knitted and Constructed Forms," with works by six artists. Photo/Susan Einstein. 3 Velvet da Vinci (San Francisco, CA, Oct. 25-Nov.ig) Ivy Leaf Halo, 1997, photo -- etched glass pearls, 4 inches high, in "Tiaras Will Be Worn," a traveling exhibition. The British artist's tiara was worn by Gwyneth Paltrow in the film Shakespeare in Love. Photo/A.C. Cooper. 4 Saint Peter's Church Living Room Gallery (New York City, solo exhibition, Sept. 21-Nov. 6) -Dinner Print, 2ooo, needlework, pieced, painted cloth, 36 by 30 inches, among five works. Catalog: 15 pages, $10, 212-6915956. Temkin had a solo exhibition at Art Resources Transfer, Inc., New York City (Oct. 4-Nov. 4). 5 Buffalo State College Burchfield-Penney Art Center (New York, Sept. 9-Nov. 26) -Untitled, 2000, ceramic, 163/4 by 171/4 by 163/4 inches, in "Craft Art Western New York zooo," a juried biennial exhibition featuring 62 works by 46 artists. Catalog: 56 pages, $6.95, 716878-6011. 1 University of North Texas Art Gallery (Denton, solo exhibition, Aug. 31-Sept. 22) - Family Reunion, 2000 dimensions varible. Photo/Jonathan Reynolds. 2 Kennesaw State University Fine Arts Gallery (Georgia, Sept. 8-Oct. 18) - Small Doll -- Like Figures, 2000, ceramic, 6 by 6 by 17 inches, in "MAsters of Their Craft," with works by nine artists. Concurrently, at the university's Sturgis Library Gallery, was "Spotlight 2000," a juried exhibition in conjunction with the American Craft Council/Southeast Region's confernece (Sept. 8-9). Photo/Bart Kasten. 3 William Traver Gallery (Seattle, WA, solo exhibition, Aug. 4-Sept. 3) -Slocums Neck Boat, 2000, cast glass, 7 by 14 by 4 inches, among 15 works. Photo/Douglas Schaible. Photograph Photograph // 4 Suraci Gallery (Marywood University, Scranton, PA, solo exhibition, Oct. 12-Dec. 15) - Teapot with Folding Handle, 1998, silver, Corian, 12 by 5 by 5 inches, among 15 works by the Scottish silversmith. 5 Objects of Desire Gallery (Louisville, KY, Ocy. 20-Nov. 23) - Ring 2 1/2 inches, and sculptural ceramics by Gene Gnida. Photo/Gene Gnida. 1 College of St. Catherine Catherine G. Murphy Gallery (St. Paul, MN, Nov. 11-Dec. 17) - Holocaust Hankie Ill: Bhakti's Sky, 2000, handkerchief, beads, fabric scraps, feathers, handstitched, 14 by 16 inches, in "Telling Textiles," with works by Ursula McCarty, Nancy Gipple and Mary Hark. 2 Monmouth College Len G. Everett Gallery (Illinois, solo exhibition, Aug. 28-Sept. 22) -Sphota, 2000, porcelain, iron, io by 6 inches, among 12 works. Photo/Michael Kreisner. 3 Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art (Chicago, IL, solo exhibition, Sept. 8-Nov. 25) -Untitled, 1991, mixed media, 22 by 451/2 by to inches, among 31 works. Photo/Leon A. Borensztein. 4 Margo Jacobson Gallery (Portland, OR, Sept. 7-30) -- Overtures, 2000, earthenware, mixed media, 26 by 22 by 22 inches, and paintings by Mark Rediske. 5 19-Dec. 31) - Gearworks, 2000, hand-and machine -- pieced printed cotton, 78 by 78 inches, in "Second Impressions: Quilters Celebrate Cocheco Fabrics," a juried exhibition of 32 works. The competition was sponsored by P &; B Textiles, Burlingame, CA, to celebrate the launch of its reproduction fabrics patterned after Cocheco Print Works designs in the museum's collection. Photo/Kevin Harkins. Photograph Sidebar CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT: SONDRA SHERMAN-A Waterfall, 1997, neckpiece, sterling silver, 18k gold, river garnets, glass beads, 18 inches long, photo/Peter Groesbeck; JANEL JACOBSON-The Hidden One, 1998, carved, stained boxwood, stag antler, amber inlay, 1718 by 15/s by 3/4 inches, collection of Shirley and Eugene Cordes, CONSUELO JIMENEZ UNDERWOOD - The Sacred Jump, 1994, woven, silk-screened, assembled silk, gold and barbed wire, paint 83 by 38 by 1 inches; MARY JACKSON-Untitled with Handle, 1999, coiled sweet grass, pine needles, palmetto, 15y by 16 1/4, 1998, hollow -- formed, raised, fabricated brass, 12 by 48 by 30 inches, collection of Mint Museum of Craft+ Design. Author Affiliation Sarah Tanguy, an art historian, lives in Washington, DC //
American Craft Council Honorary Fellow Margery Anneberg (1921-2003) died May 19 in Hayward, CA, from complications of multiple sclerosis. When she opened the Anneberg Gallery, in 1966 in San Francisco, it was one of the first in the area to show art in craft media-among the "local" artists she exhibited were Dominic Di Mare, Marvin Lipofsky, Ed Rossbach, Katherine Westphal, Kay Sekimachi, Trude Guermonprez and June Schwarcz. She also displayed folk art from around the world to demonstrate its significant kinship with craft art. But seeing a need for more education behind these exhibitions, she founded the nonprofit Center for Folk Art and Contemporary Craft in 1972, head-quartered in her gallery, and published a newsletter. By the time she closed the gallery, in 1981, partly for reasons of health, Anneberg had become involved in the founding, with Gertrud Parker, of the San Francisco Museum of Craft &; Folk Art, which opened in 1983, and which she served as curator until retiring in 1986. Born in Carroll, IA, Anneberg was of Washington, Seattle, earning a degree in social science. She returned there after World War II to pursue a doctorate in Asian studies, including Chinese language and literature. But her developing interest in making jewelry (ignited by classes taken in New York City during the war) eventually superseded her academic pursuits. After moving to San Francisco, in 1957, Anneberg continued to make jewelry while employed in various capacities in the library at the University of California, Berkeley, where today an interview with her is part of the California Craft Artist Oral History Series. In 1964 she opened The Jewelry Shop, which two years later became the Anneberg Gallery. In tribute to her longtime friend and supporter, enamelist June Schwarcz says: "Margery Anneberg gave those of us who are craftsmen an audience. She helped give the work the prestige it deserved. To those who love the ethnic arts, she brought delight, stimulation, information and the spirits of other cultures into our lives." Blacksmith C. Cart Jennings built in Sonoma, CA. Athird-generation blacksmith, he was born in Marion, IL, and began working in metal in 1928, alongside his father, before attending the California College of Arts and Crafts, Oakland (B.F.A., 1934). He was employed in several blacksmith shops in the San Francisco Bay Area before opening his own, El Diablo Forge, in Lafayette, CA, in 1947, where he created architectural wrought metal for such clients as the Christian Brothers Winery, St. Helena, and the Chapel of the Chimes, Oakland. In 1969, he and his wife, Elizabeth, moved to Sonoma and spent the next five years living in a trailer while they built their unique circular house of hand-laid stone and forged steel, with huge round windows incorporating glass bottles from a local vineyard (featured m American Craft February/March 2001). "From cabinet pulls to window mullions, from front door to Carl's ingenious versions of a commode, the relationships of metal to wood to ceramic, glass," James Wallace, director of the National Ornamental Metal Museum, Memphis, TN, has said of the house. "Carl leaves us the lesson of what it means to be an artist-craftsman." Jennings received the Award of Merit from the Sonoma League for Historic Preservation in 1980 and the Alex Bealer Award from the Artist-Blacksmith's Association of North America, in 1988, the same year he was named a Fellow of the American Craft Council. Eight forged steel vessels Jennings left to the National Ornamental Metal Museum are on view there through September 21. Bob Winston (1915-2003), a pioneer in the studio jewelry movement known for his intricately textured works employing lost-wax casting, died April 6 in Pleasant Hill, CA. Early in his career, Winston developed his own tools by modifying dental instruments, which allowed him to capture the delicacy of the small organic objects he often cast. "Seek and ye shall find in Nature that which would inspire a solution to the most perplexing of designs," treatise on the process. Born in Long Beach, CA, Winston studied art and art history at the University of California, Berkeley (B.F.A., 1942, M.A., 1944). A professor at the California College of Arts and Crafts, Oakland, from 1942 to 1958, he later taught extension courses at the University of Arizona, Phoenix, and workshops at his Pleasant Hill studio. His numerous contributions to the field include the invention of a gold and silver jewelry oxidizer, Win-Ox, in the 1940s, to which he added oxidizers for bronze, nickel and copper in the late 19903. He was a founder, in 1951, of the San Francisco Metal Arts Guild, with fellow artists Merry Renk, Irena Brynnerand Florence Resnikoff, among others. In 1997, he was elected a Fellow of the American Craft Council. Ceramist Anne Kraus (1956-2003), whose painted vessels incorporate images and text from her dreams, died May 23 in Louisville, CO, of cancer. Born in Short Hills, Philadelphia (B.A. painting 1978), she was drawn to ceramics in 1980, after viewing the Metropolitan Museum of Art's collection of court porcelains. "I was bothered that such beautiful objects could be so void of emotional depth," she said of the experience, which led her to enroll at the New York State College of Ceramics, Alfred University (B.F.A. 1984). Kraus went on to exhibit her work in numerous group and solo shows, and she is represented in several museum collections, including the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, CA, the Newark Museum, NJ, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. "One thing that distinguishes ceramics for me-and which never happened with painting-is that I tumbled head over heels into it," she was quoted as saying in an essay by Garth Clark in the catalog for her 1998 survey at his New York City gallery. "It was like being swept up in a huge wave. My feeling for ceramic history, for something that I find so beautiful and I just want to make my version of it. It is a gift, a payment, that I make to the tradition."
AMERICAN CRAFT invites the submission of quality images (slides, transparencies, 300 dpi digital title) of major works commissioned to American craft artists. Complete project information must be supplied. Only works installed after December 2003 are eligible. Photograph // For the new student center at Baton Rouge Community College, MICHAEL CAIN fabricated Reach, an installation that he says "addresses the array of choices one faces when setting out on a path toward future goals." Commissioned by the Louisiana Division of the Arts percent for art program, the work consists primarily of 18 aluminum and neon "light box paintings," each 8 by 3 feet by 7 inches, and is positioned along the center's 50-foot-diameter rotunda. Neon casts ambient light on the painted boxes and the surrounding wall. To create continuity from the walls to the open space and to amplify the theme, the New Orleans artist mounted aluminum laddersand rings, also backlit by neon, to each of four columns supporting the ceiling. Photograph // In this hooked rug and others by the textile artist MARYANNE WISE of Pepin and the Mississippi River near her home, which is also a sanctuary area for North America's migratory birds. Following a traditional process, Wise made the 29-by-47-inch rug using nevvand recycled wool fabric-as is or dyed and over-dyed-cut into one-quarter-inch strips, which she pulled loop by loop through a cotton ground cloth. The rug is in the collection of Connee Mayeron Cowles. Photo/Peter Lee. Photograph // Marc and Diane Grainer of Maryland, already collectors of work by SONDRA SHERMAN of Pawtucket, RI, commissioned Double Happiness, his-and-hers brooches of silver, 18k gold, diamonds, 3 by 1 inches and 4 by 1 inches, with a presentation box. Conjoined, they resemble a corsage, suggesting a celebration of the marital bond; the container refers to an old-fashioned corsage box. Photos/Marty Doyle Photograph // Commissioned by the Lurie Company for the lobby of its 120 South LaSalle Street Building, Chicago, IL, Repose in Amber is an abstract reclining female figure, 40 feet long, composed of five "islands" steel. Each island represents a part of the human anatomy-head, torso, hips, thighs and feet-with the viewer's eye connecting each section through the negative space between. MARTIN BLANK fabricated the sculpture in his Seattle, WA, studio with a crew of five-Michael Church, Brian Koontz, Jason Christian, Darin Denison and Aaron Tate. Chicago gallery owner Susan Pertl was instrumental in bringing the artist's work to the attention of Michael Kurzman of Lurie Management, LLC. Photo/Mark Ballog. Seeing the retrospective of the glass artist RICHARD JOLLEY, at the Knoxville Museum of Art in 2002-3, Francis Graffeo, general director and conductor of the Knoxville Opera Company, invited him to design sets for a new production of The Magic Flute, scheduled for October 2004. As the time period of this Mozart opera is not specific, Jotley freely incorporated Egyptian and Greco-Roman motifs, often with human figures taking the place of architectural columns. His acrylic drawings were transferred to the stage through traditional backdrop painting and by a process involving They were then printed on plastic film and mounted on Plexiglas panels. Pictured here is the final scene of the opera. Photo/Eric Smith. (The Jotley retrospective is at Longwood Center for the Visual Arts, Farmville, VA, through july 16; a solo exhibit of the artist's work is at the Arkansas Arts Center, Little Rock, through july 3) Photograph //
. WHILE THE STARS ARE OUT AT THE OSCARS, IT'S THEIR CHAUFFEURS WHO ARE PARTYING. They call it Hollywood's biggest party. But even on Oscar night -- just a few short yards up into the Hollywood Hills, where the searchlights from the Kodak Theatre cut into the darkening sky to play chase with the circling helicopters -- there is a more exclusive party going on, a secret affair that few civilians will ever see. Like the swallows that return to Capistrano, the limos that flock to the Hollywood Bowl are one of nature's greatest mysteries. Around 3 o'clock, the drivers drop their celebrity clients at the red carpet, then negotiate a maze of orange cones into the six-tiered parking lot of the world-famous Hollywood Bowl, an outdoor concert hall. Their cars are black, always black -- white is for prom. The drivers greet one another with laughter, a sea of men in dark suits watching DVDs in their limos and playing poker at round tables. They are diverse in age, color, and background. No one seems to the black guys, who give it right back; everyone makes fun of the Russians. Nothing can kill the mood. "This is our bread-and-butter night," they say. "This is our Christmas party." There are 571 limos parked in perfect formation next to the covered patio where the Oscar ceremony plays on flat-screen TVs and the drivers dine on buffet pasta catered by the Bowl. The smell of spaghetti fills the chilly March night. It would be awesome if the first rule of the Limo Club was, You do not talk about Limo Club. It's not. Driver personalities vary from salesman to creepy uncle to stoic, but everyone is willing to talk. Our guide into this elite fraternity is 10-year veteran Bill Dreschner, a gregarious part-timer who works a day job training managers for Costco. Bill is very quick to tell us that the chauffeurs' fish tales -- stories of the unspeakable things that happen when the partition is up -- are frequently exaggerated. "You only believe one percent of it never happened." But we hear about it anyway -- about the actor dressed like a lobster, smoking a joint in the backseat; about the actor who got severely coked up on his way to do an interview about getting clean; about breast-feeding and boob jobs and another kind of job that starts with b. We start to wish we hadn't asked. The Limo Club's actual rules are simple: Never outdress the client. Treat everyone the same. What happens in the limo, stays in the limo. There is debate about whether the men are "chauffeurs" or "drivers." To some, "chauffeur" denotes a servant in a hat (the "old-fashioned" hat is also a bone of contention in these modern times). To others, "driver" sounds unprofessional. "It has to do with a work ethic," one chauffeur muses -- this one a rare female, a unicorn among the horses. At 7:30, there is a car has been sideswiped by a black car, and 571 limo drivers crane their necks to look. This is not where you want to have an accident, not tonight, not in front of the pros. Someone says, "Maybe that's a sign as to what's gon na win Best Picture." When we look at him confused, thinking about broken things, he raises an eyebrow back. "Crash!" Yes, it is indeed a magical night. And at around eight, as driver after driver rises to answer the PA system's restaurant-style repetitions of "Car 2252, your client is ready," Bill drives us away from the emerging chaos. We pass north of the Kodak to sneak a glimpse down the hill, following the trail of cones leading to the searchlights from the other party, where the celebrity clients are waiting. For a limo driver, the client is always waiting. But ideally not for too long: That'll mess with your tip. SIDEBAR'RE THE GUY WHO ONCE MADE A $20K TIP? CEPHAS: I DID. I TOOK A MICROSOFT EXEC TO PORTLAND, OREGON, FROM DISNEYLAND. EW: HOW LONG IS THAT? CEPHAS: SEVENTEEN AND A HALF HOURS. EW: AND THEN HE GAVE YOU $20K? CEPHAS: $20K. HE PUT IT ON THE AMERICAN EXPRESS. I THOUGHT HE WAS KIDDING. EW: YOU'RE A LEGEND. CEPHAS: WAIT A MINUTE. I AI N'T DEAD. Reference See also cover story on page 36 of same issue. See also additional image(s) in Cover Image file and Table of Contents of same issue. Author Affiliation WHITNEY PASTOREK Illustration PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; The Hollywood Bowl parking lot; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; A rare shot of the drivers watching the awards show; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; Chillin' in the ride; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; Walking the line: The chauffeurs refuel before the big night is over; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; The hurry-up- and-wait $5,000; great night of poker: $35; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; A quick smoke to pass the time; PHOTO PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRUCE GILDEN; PHOTO //
Aviara is a must-play for any San Diego visitor; its beauty and emphasis on creative shotmaking make it both memorable and fun. // THE SAN DIEGO AREA has many assets: a mild yearround climate, a dramatic Pacific coastline and an array of leisure activities, such as Sea World and the San Diego Zoo. Its proximity to Mexico gives the city a cultural flair, and it is mentioned on several lists of the best places to live. In short, it would seem to have all the elements for a firstclass golf destination. The truth is, however, that there is a big drop-off in quality between the top tier and those below (although there's not always a dropoff in price). San Diego County has more than 80 golf facilities, and it becomes tough to weed out the very good from the simply average. So San Diego becomes a first-class destination only if you know the places to go. The attempt here, then, is to present the upper tier. The region can be divided into two areas. North County and extending up towards the Riverside County line, includes Aviara, La Costa, Rancho Bernardo Inn, Mt. Woodson, Temecula Creek Inn and Redhawk. The immediate metro area and eastern suburbs contain Torrey Pines, Carlton Oaks, Steele Canyon and Coronado. One thing that should be mentioned right away is the area's breadth. This isn't Pinehurst or Pebble Beach, where most of the top courses are within an easy drive. Be prepared to log some miles on the freeways of Southern California, as some of the facilities require a 45-minute drive or more to get to the first tee. Consequently, finding a place to stay in the correct region makes the process of traveling to the courses much more manageable. NORTH COUNTY Built upon a hilly, rugged piece of property in the town of Carlsbad, the superb Aviara Golf Club is an upscale gem that provides an interesting, challenging, yet fair test of golf. Arnold Palmer, reversing a trend seen in some of his other courses, has a chance to score well. Stretching to 7,007 yards from the tips, Aviara can be daunting on a few holes, but has excellent visual definition to help rookie players feel more comfortable. The huge greens afford many pin positions, altering the necessary shape and length of approaches each time around. Each nine has a different flavor, with the front side climbing to the course's apex before culminating in the seventh through ninth holes, three exciting downhillers. The seventh extends to 404 yards, and the approach shot plays off a downhill lie to an undulating green guarded by deep bunkers. The eighth presents an interesting decision for the long hitter. Playing 536 yards downhill, it can be reached in two after a good drive. However, a pond guards the front, making it a risky proposition. Standing on the tee of the 375yard, dogleg-right ninth, you may feel that a good drive down the right might cut the corner and even reach the green. However, a carry of about 290 smart play is a long iron down the left to leave a good angle into the large, two-tiered green. The flatter back nine meanders through a heavily-wooded valley surrounded by hills, upon which expansive homes are being built at a intense pace. Fortunately, they do not encroach on play. The landscaping around many of the holes is lavish, with abundant waterfalls and foliage. However, the site's natural beauty is impressive enough on its own. Aviara opened in 1991 but had been in the planning stages since 1988, when a full-scale resort was proposed for the site. The resort plans were put on hold after a severe economic downturn hit California. The golf course proceeded as planned, however, and earned distinction as a GOLF MAGAZINE "Top 10 You Can Play" pick for 1992. It stood alone until early August 1997, when the $200 million Four Seasons Resort Aviara finally opened its doors. The hotel is majestic. Sitting atop a hill overlooking the golf course and the nearby Batiquitos Lagoon Aviara a complete resort destination. Photograph The par-five 10th hole on La Costa's North Course is an attractive three-shotter offering updeep bunkers, a large pond and a slick green. Photograph The tee shot on the 171-yard seventh hole at Steele Canyon must carry a deep ravine and avoid pot bunkers to reach the hillside green. // Almost directly across El Camino Real-Carlsbad's main drag from Aviara is the La Costa Resort &; Spa, a GOLF MAGAZINE Silver Medal Resort and a Southern California institution for 33 years. Although the resort is famous for its spa, the golf at La Costa is also well-known, as the host of the PGA Tour's season-opening Mercedes Championships since 1969 (the event moves to Hawaii in 1999). The tournament is played over a composite layout of the North and South courses, consisting of holes one through three and 13-18 of the North Course and the entire back nine of the South course. These comprised the resort's original 18 holes, designed by Dick Wilson and opened in 1964 completed nine more holes in 1973 and the final nine in 1985 to complete the two distinct layouts. The South Course gets more publicity and television time during the tournament, but the 6,987yard North Course is the more intriguing layout. It was the parthree 16th hole of the North (played as the seventh during the tournament), on which Tiger Woods beat Tom Lehman in a one-hole playoff to win the 1997 event. Crossing the road after the North Course's third hole brings the player to the most interesting nine holes on the property. Four through 12 traverse rolling hillsides and a series of pesky lakes. The par-four seventh, at 460 yards from the tips, is a simple but great golf hole with an excellent view of the surrounding hills. A downhill tee shot sets up a midiron approach from an uneven lie to a small green. Nothing fancy, just a strategic and scenic hole. The stretch runs on both courses are memorable, but the edge has to go to the 6,894-yard South. the prevailing wind. The approach shot on the 568-yard, par-five 17th is one of the scariest in golf, with water guarding the entire right side and trees to the left. Take advantage of a rare treat while at La Costa: being able to walk the golf course. For $40, a caddie will guide you across the property, and the course's relative flatness makes it easy on the legs. La Costa is a part of the old guard of resorts that attracts many visitors on its name alone. The courses could use better maintenance in spots, but in fairness to the grounds crew, many of the brownish patches of grass are caused by salt water seeping into the course's lower spots from a nearby lagoon. Play on both courses is reserved for hotel guests and the over 600 members of the golf club, many of whom live out of the area. Tee times are available with advance planning and the pace of play is good for a resort. To the east, in Bernardo Inn awaits visitors looking for an authentic western resort experience. The community dates back to 1769 when it was created from a land grant by the King of Spain. The Battle of San Pasqual took place here in 1846, playing a pivotal role in the annexation of California by the U.S. two years later. Rancho Bernardo takes on a frontier theme, despite its 1990's suburban environment. The buildings are characterized by dark woods and soft lighting, with earthy decorations and a saloon-style lounge. The resort's original West Course was designed by Ted Robinson, a prolific California architect. An old-style course stretching to 6,458 yards from the back tees, the West is routed through a valley and features generally small greens and treelined fairways. Characteristic of many older courses, the holes are very straightforward. Though it is not without challenge, this is a course on which better players can expect to score well, given they can hit the target greens. For an entirely different golf experience, head to the hills, a layout unlike anything else in the area. Picture the rockiest, most rugged hills you've ever seen and you've got the setting for this 6, 113-yard track, where being a billy goat would seem to an advantage. In fact, the site is a thriving nature preserve, with several species of plant and animal life. This is the toughest 6,000yard course you will ever play, as it demands some long carries off the tee and precise club selection to avoid the unplayable vegetation engulfing the property. Each hole is named, including such favorites as "Razor's Edge," "The Plunge," and "Make a Bet." The layout has some fantastic short par fours and a downright sadistic par-three third hole, which at 202 yards from the tips demands a perfect tee shot to avoid the woods both left and right. The 361-yard 17th hole begins at the highest point on the course, and requires a solid tee shot to have a good angle into the green. play here scoring should not be a major problem. Just in case, bring extra balls and a positive attitude, and be sure to take the time to enjoy the stunning views of the stark countryside. Mt. Woodson is just off Archie Moore Road, and the famed boxer's training facility overlooks the course from a nearby hill. The clubhouse is next to the Amy Strong Castle, a national historic landmark completed in 1921. A seamstress who was said to have run one of the first garment factories in San Diego, Strong retired in 1912 and used her earnings to invest in the 27-room mansion, where she lived until 1940. Heading north on Interstate 15, just over the Riverside County line, is the hamlet of Temecula and the Temecula Creek Inn. This 27hole facility was co-designed by Ted Robinson and Dick Rosen, with the Oaks and Creek nines coming first in 1969 and the Stonehouse nine added a few years later. The Oaks is by far the best nine on the property, as eight provide an interesting mix of challenges, and several holes look right in the face of the surrounding mountains. Elevated tees and slight doglegs characterize the layout, with the 404-yard fourth hole demanding a drive down the right to have an open angle into the green. The ninth hole on the Oaks, and indeed the ninth hole on all three nines, is unfortunately out of character with the previous eight holes. A par four stretching to 405 yards, the ninth at the Oaks has an extremely narrow driving area, set between two artificial lakes. The green is surrounded by water on three sides with a tall fountain to the left. After eight enjoyable holes, the gimmicks are a bit of a letdown. The Creek nine is more traditional resort golf, with open fairways and smaller greens. The two par fives are relatively open, so the green light is on to fire away. If you like target golf and want some practice on uneven lies, head to the Stonehouse nine. The first come. It's a 505yard par five with a blind, uphill tee shot to a narrow landing area. From there, the hole doglegs left around a treeline to a narrow green. Par is a very good score here. Holes three through seven demand accuracy and some local knowledge to score. The third, a 402-yard par four, plays up to the crest of a hill before tumbling back down to a green obscured a by a large tree. Even if your game is on, these nine holes can be a maddening roller-coaster ride. The Temecula Creek Inn is situated in a fertile valley with 14 wineries in the immediate area. Save time for a tour of the winemaking process, especially if it's been a tough day on the course. Just a few miles east of Temecula lies Redhawk Golf Club, a planned community, still partly under construction, with an interesting 7,180-yard layout as its centerpiece. The course was designed by architect Fred Bliss and PGA Tour pro Mark O'Meara, and desert. An impressive set of long par fours greatly toughens the track, and the holes are woven together nicely. Characterized by deep grass and sand bunkers around the greens, Redhawk is not overly challenging from the tee but plays tough if your iron game is not on. Many of the greens have severe slopes, and the fourth has four separate tiers on which pin positions can be placed. Many greens are encircled by fairway chipping areas, creating the possibility of long putts from off the green and bringing bump-and-runs into play. // At a Glance Photograph The 36 holes at Torrey Pines are bustling with locals and tourists, all coming to experience the beauty and thrill of golf by the Pacific. // The 165-yard eighth hole plays to an island green, but the most dramatic par three on the course is the 17th. Standing on the elevated back tee, 210 yards from the green, one gets the feeling they are teeing off the edge of a cliff. Even with the expansion of the surrounding fully private. With reasonable green fees and a friendly staff, it's worth the drive to play this one. METRO SAN DIEGO The most storied and perhaps best-loved property in the immediate San Diego area is Torrey Pines, a 36-hole municipal facility which has hosted the PGA Tour's Buick Invitational (formerly San Diego Open) since 1968. Torrey Pines consists of the sportier 6,647-yard North Course, which the PGA Tour pros play in either the first or second round, and the 7,055-yard South Course, which hosts the weekend play. Managed by the city of San Diego, these two remarkable layouts are a great example of toplevel municipal golf. Laid out over the cliffs of La Jolla, north of downtown, they offer breathtaking ocean views and an ongoing battle with the wind. The brawnier South Course has no gimmicks or illusions-it's just a pure test of golf. Holes two through five are set atop an oceanside cliff. The 453-yard, par four fourth hole is as tough as any in the area, and the narrow, slick green usually requires a long iron to reach in two. The South's back nine is varied, with 12 and 13 a dynamic duo of challenge and beauty. Upon completing the tough 468-yard, parfour 12 th, the par-five 13 th stretches to 535 yards and features a fairway which dives into a deep ravine about 200 yards short of the green. The blind approach is then hit to a small, undulating green. The North Course, while shorter, also has a superb set of oceanfront holes and plays very fairly. The signature hole is the sixth, a downhill par three stretching to 206 yards from the tips but playing around 155 for most players. With a tiny green set in between three bunkers and a dangerous falloff to the left, this shot is one of the trickiest on the course. Torrey Pines is the only public facility in San Diego directly on the ocean, making it wildly popular with both locals and tourists. Which brings us to the a decision to make. You can call the computerized tee time reservation number (619-570-1234) up to seven days in advance, starting at 5:00 a.m. Pacific Time, and try your luck. Hint: especially with a foursome, don't bet on this method. Locals have a big edge, as their "redial fingers" are in top shape. The most reliable, albeit most costly, way to get on Torrey Pines is to call the pro shop at (619) 452-3226 and book a tee time more than one week in advance. This package deal includes tee time, cart and three holes played with the local golf professional, for $95 ($45 above the regular green fee). For overnight golf packages, the Lodge at Torrey Pines (800995-4507) offers a two-night, one-round package with breakfast from $199 per person. The bottom line, however, is that it's worth the hassle to play Torrey Pines. The courses may not be immaculate (they get over 300,000 rounds high and the experience is memorable. Moving inland, Carlton Oaks is a Perry Dye-redesign of a course originally built in 1960. Reopened in 1989 after a one-year, $5 million renovation, Carlton Oaks has now taken its place among the better layouts in the area. Located in a tranquil valley east of downtown, the layout is more than 7,000 yards from the tips and features several of the usual Dye characteristics: railroad ties, short par fours, and deep pot bunkers. Number five is only 305 yards long, but it's almost impossible to get close to the green with your drive. Tall mounds, a series of bunkers, and a fairway which narrows to just over 15 feet wide make it a gamble not worth taking. // Ole! // The back nine is longer and has less water than the front. Holes 13 through 15 will test your patience, as they are all long and narrow, with a precipitous number of mounds and pot bunkers. Carlton Oaks has a limited number available. The easternmost course of note is the Gary Player-designed Steele Canyon Golf Club, in the town of Jamul. The 27 holes-the Canyon, Ranch and Meadows nines-are carved through a variety of terrain. The Canyon Course is the most spectacular, beginning at the clubhouse and rising swiftly up a hillside. The downhill fourth hole, called "Goosebumps," plays a bit shorter than its 524 yards and offers a great view from the tee. Its narrow fairway is tough to hit, and the approach to the green must carry a ravine of brush and rocks. The Ranch nine winds through a working cattle ranch called Ivanhoe. The owner of the ranch at one time owned all the property on which Steele Canyon sits, but sold off a large parcel for the building of the golf club. Beyond the fifth hole, a tricky par five entitled "Double Cross," is a display of ancient farm equipment dating back to the turn of the century, making the journey to the next tee far of the three, as it is routed through an adjacent housing development and offers little in the way of dramatic shots. Steele Canyon is less diabolical than many other Gary Player designs, and fits in very well with the surrounding property. Walking is allowed, and affords the best means of enjoying the views. The final stop is downtown San Diego, or rather the quaint community of Coronado, which sits right across San Diego Bay. It is home to the world-famous Hotel del Coronado and a large Navy air station, as well as a pretty nifty municipal golf course. Considerably less expensive than others in the area, and slightly easier to get on than Torrey Pines, Coronado is a windswept 6,633 yarder with super views of downtown and the waterfront. Opened in 1955, the holes are fun and in decent condition, and the atmosphere is unpretentious. Five holes are on the bay, while the others roam through a heavily-wooded parkland setting. Holes 14-16 look out over a huge marina and the Hotel inland, but were later "moved" to the waterfront. They were built on landfill from the construction of the Coronado Bridge, connecting downtown with the tiny Coronado Island. Coronado's airy new clubhouse looks like it belongs in a fancy country club. The course is also undergoing some minor renovations, including the lengthening of the 10th hole. For additional resources on San Diego golf, check out Martin Olivera's San Diego Golf Pages website at www.golfsd.com, or call the San Diego Convention &; Visitors Bureau at (619) 236-1212 for a free golf and visitors guide. Photograph The rugged mountains around Temecula Creek are a wind tunnel for fresh ocean breezes. //
// Not so longago we had a quiet little game. Golfers were a clannish bunch and we kept mostly to ourselves. We didn't draw much attention, except during the major championships when Arnold Palmer or Jack Nichlaus got the attention of non-golfers four times a year. We learned the game from our fathers or by hanging out at the golf courses or from a kind pro who didn't charge $150 for half an hour of his wisdom. We played with forged blades and persimmon woods with steel shafts. Balata off a Bull's Eye was the best feeling in the game. Then, one day-and it's difficult to pick out exactly when that was-the perception of our game changed. Was it during the go-go 1980's, when the ubiquitos Baby Boomers started playing golf in increasing numbers? Was it prior to the 1990 PGA Championship at Shoal Creek, which opened the Pandora's Box of private club integration and forced golf to open its arms to people of both sexes and all colors? Was it sometime after the 1987 Ryder Cup, when the creating the Ryder Cup as golfs most thrilling spectator event even for non-golfers? Was it during the 1991 PGA Championship, when John Daly and his white driver with the red shaft gripped and ripped his way into blue-collar hearts and invited those who had never played before to give golf a try? Or was it three years ago, when Tiger Woods exploded into the professional game and declared, "I want golf to look like America." Who knows how to delineate when the so-called "golf boom" actually arrived or whether it actually did? Although there have been some fluctuations in the number of golfers in the United States, the number of rounds played each year has been flat since 1986. Still, golf is hotter than at any time in its history. And, the scorching from its afterburners has left an indelible mark. Today, $100 green fees and $500 titanium drivers seem to be the rule rather than the exception. We built a course a day for 10 years, as we were spots golfers still can't get starting times. Millions came to our game, including movie stars, rock stars, athletes from other sports, and corporate titans. But millions left during the same period. Was golf too expensive? Too time-consuming? Too hard? All of the above? Research shows that more people watch golf on television than ever before and that there are more people who want to play than are actually playing. What's stopping them? Has all the progress of the last few years made our game better? And where are we headed from here? As golf-and the rest of the world-approaches the 21st century, GOLF MAGAZINE will conduct an examination of the issues that affect all golfers, from public to private, young to old, beginners to tournament players. What follows is a preview of the in-depth articles that will appear, one a month, between June and November. And in December, with the year 2000 a tap-in away, we'll ask for your opinions. Because it's vital we take a hard look at what will keep it that way. June: Access Nearly nine years has passed since the ugly situation reared its head at Shoal Creek Country Club, outside Birmingham, Alabama, site of the 1990 PGA Championship. The club's membership was all white and club president Hall Thompson said out loud that he intended that it remain that way. The reverberations heightened public awareness, which caused hundreds of private clubs to stop their segregationist membership practices. The fallout was considerable. None of the major golf organizations would allow tournaments to be held at clubs that weren't integrated. Even Augusta National, which usually does what it wants, welcomed a black member into its green-jacketed enclave. What did these changes mean for the rest of us? For one, our game was analyzed, dissected, sliced, and diced like never before. We became aware of other people's conceptions-sometimes misconceptions-about golf. As a result of this scrutiny, governing bodies have made access a priority visible programs that attempt to make golf more accessible to children, especially those in inner cities. For the average golfer, there has never been a better time or opportunity to play. According to a National Golf Foundation study released in January, the number of golf courses in the U.S. has tripled-from about 5,000 to 15,000-since 1950. The number of golfers per course has increased almost five times-400 to 1,950during the same period. The study says, "The growth of public access golf is the story of the last three decades. By the year 2000, daily fee courses (privately owned, publicly accessible facilities) will account for approximately half of all golf facility inventory." Private courses will account for only 30 percent of the number of courses, a complete reversal from the 60 percent the study showed in 1950. All of which means that you don't have to belong to a private club anymore to have access to quality golf. In fact, according to the figures, just the opposite is true said a course a day must be built for the next 10 years to meet demand. Well, that was done, but neither the number of golfers nor the number of rounds played increased significantly to meet the supply. In 1986, the average number of golfers per course was 1,900, at a time when demand was outracing supply. Today, that trend is in reverse. Utilization rates have decreased from a high in 1990 of 90 percent utilization-based on a desired rate of 48,800 rounds a year per course-to 80 percent in 1998. Unless more players are found, that number is likely to decrease as more courses are being built. Expect to see, according to the NGF, 350 to 450 new courses opened each year for the next three to five years. That's more than a course a day. The NGF predicts a 2.6 percent annual growth in courses as opposed to a 1.5 percent annual growth in players. That could drive the desired utilization rate down to 77 percent in 2010 and create. All those figures, while predicting dire times for the industry, should be good news for avid golfers who drive the game's economy. Why? Because this means courses should be less crowded in the coming years. July: Cost Ever wonder what happened to the $1.50 golf ball, the $20 green fees, the $5,000 club initiation? Or simply the days when you could hang your coat on a hook and go play? Gone forever, unfortunately. You once could play Pebble Beach or St. Andrews for $10. Today, even if you can get a starting time, you'll have to pony up $295 for Pebble and $160 for St. Andrews. My, how times have changed. The Americanization of the game has forced a new meaning to the words "demographic" and "high-end." Bigger is better in our lexicon, whether it comes in the guise of courses, equipment, second homes, or club memberships. But golf in our country has always been income driven. Those that regard, the game is as elitist as ever. Twenty-two percent of the nation's golfers play 70 percent of the rounds and account for 61 percent of the spending on golf. That avid minority drives the golf business, and the items they buy keep escalating in price. Apparently golfers can afford it because that segment of the population is flush with disposable income. The wholesale price of golf clubs has doubled since 1986; so have green fees and cart fees. The NGF study shows that golfers' spending has almost tripled since 1986-from $7.8 billion to $22 billion in 1997. There are no signs of any slowdown. August: Etiquette Golf has long suffered an image problem of one kind or another. There is the pervasive notion that golf is a country-club game. Statistics prove otherwise. Today, the image that disturbs a large segment of the population is that of the cigar-smoking, cell phone-talking, "you-da-man" yelling, noveaugauche golfer who seems pervasive both on the course and in galleries at PGA for attracting a new breed of fan, those who like their caps backward, their pants baggy, and their beer cold. But at the grass-roots level, even at the most exclusive clubs, niceties that were taken for granted are being ignored. For example: repairing ball marks, replacing divots, raking bunkers, talking while someone else is playing. Over the years, etiquette was taught by observing experienced, often more skilled players. It was handed down through generations and respected as part of the game. Today, we seem to have a difficult time teaching newcomers and making it stick. Some think new golfers are ignorant of the game's traditions, others believe they simply have the attitude, "I've paid my money, I can do what I want." Either way, some wonder who will carry the message to the next group of golfers. September: Pace of Play Golf simply takes too long to play, from public courses to the PGA Tour. Who wants to spend waiting on every shot, thereby leaving one (or both) of your weekend days shot to hell? The answer: no one. But courses around the country are jammed wall to wall with players every weekend suffering the aforementioned fate. Why are we out there so long? A handful of reasons, none of which seems to have equal weight. First, there is the Tour influence. Professional players, as a group, are notoriously slow, and we tend to mimic the pros whenever possible. Look for any example close to home. Anything that has the word "tournament" attached to it will automatically add 45 minutes to an hour to the time of the round. Second, there are many new courses that sometimes take as long to get from green to tee as vice versa. A great number of them boast the four most dreaded words in golf: "Carts On Paths Only," which adds 30 to 45 minutes to a round. Sometimes courses jam too many starting times. The result is a crowded course with no place to go. The British don't have problems with slow play. They think 3 1/2 hours is an abomination (and they're right about that). They also don't use carts. How do they do it? October: Technology At no other time in the game has technology grown so much, so fast, or have golfers bought so many golf clubs so fast. Yet, we don't seem to be getting better. While we don't understand why, we still keep buying equipment. "Equipment technology and better marketing have shortened the purchase cycle of golf equipment," the NGF study says. If we are not improving, is technology at least making the game more forgiving, thereby more fun? Certainly senior players have benefitted from new clubs, balls, and shafts to compensate for their loss in flexibility and strength. The rest of us are probably hitting the ball farther and straighter than we ever have, even if hand, technology takes the blame on the professional level for more distance, which is supposed to translate into lower scores. Certainly, newer and better equipment shoulders its share of the burden, but not all the responsibility should be laid at the feet of the manufacturers. Technology has also developed better methods of course conditioning, making fairways firmer and faster while greens on the Tours are almost always nearly perfect. No wonder the pros hit it so far and make so many putts. The argument can be made that technology is merely the natural outgrowth of a booming economy. However, the game's ruling bodies feel threatened by technological breakthroughs. Is this really an issue or is it simply a butting of heads of the old guard and the new? November: The Tours The largest sphere of influence in golf belongs to the professional Tours. They control most of the big money in the game, and they hold sway-unwittingly perhaps-over what we wear, the equipment we use, and how quickly (or slowly purses this year and three World Golf Championship events will pay the winners $1 million each in official money. We could see the leading money winner this season make $3 million or more. Golf fans will benefit from the Tours' largesse. Because of the newly negotiated television contracts, for the first time every round of every PGA Tour event will be on the tube. Clothing and equipment manufacturers are happy about that knowing that part of the money they spend on television will be offset by having their staff players on camera for some "free" advertising. In turn, companies hope that if viewers see their favorite players wielding a certain club or wearing a certain shirt, they will rush out to their nearest pro shop or retailer and whip out their favorite credit card. And as long as we keep buying, they'll keep selling. That's the way of golf's brave new world. Beginning next month, we'll take a closer look at each of these issues, and how they will The spirits of Shinnecock Hills howl with the wind on the ancient glacial moraine where the white-masted clubhouse perches. Stand here long enough and you may hear the beat of Shinnecock Indian drums, the rumble of stagecoaches and Model T's, the snazzy sounds of Jazz Age clarinets, the clink of ice in cocktail glasses, the thwack of persimmon on gutta percha and the gunshot that killed the famous architect who built that famous clubhouse. Founded in 1891, Shinnecock Hills Golf Club boasts a list of firsts unrivaled by that of any other club in America. Along with The Country Club in Brookline, Mass., Newport (Rhode Island) Country Club, Chicago Golf Club and Saint Andrew's Golf Club at Hastings-on-Hudson, in New York, it was one of the clubs that formed the USGA in 1885. Shinnecock had America's first golf clubhouse (complete with locker room, showers and grill room) and the first 18-hole golf course on the East Coast. It hosted the first U.S. Open to allow African-American and Native-American golfers to compete alongside whites (see "windswept strand can trace its history beyond the Jazz Age and the previous century to pre-colonial times. The Shinnecock Indians, star-crossed whalers and fearless swimmers, once occupied much of the South Fork of eastern Long Island, east of New York City. In the winter of 1876, the tribe was struck by tragedy when nine Shinnecock braves (and one Montauk Indian brave) drowned in a dramatic attempt to rescue survivors of a cargo ship, the Circassian, which had hit a sandbar off the hamlet of Bridgehampton. In 1891, publishing magnate Edward S. Mead, who had seen a golf exhibition by Scottish pro Willie Dunn in Biarritz, France, convinced a few of his fellow aristocrats, such as Samuel Parrish and Charles Atterbury, to found Shinnecock Hills. Known as the White Course, the original 12-hole loop straddled the tracks of the Long Island Rail Road. The course was laid out by a Scottish pro named Willie Davis who had come from the Montreal Golf Club. Shinnecock Indians worked as laborers. The for women. In the summer of 1893, Dunn himself came to work at the club. He tutored golfers, among them a teenager named Beatrix Hoyt, who went on to win three U.S. Women's Amateur titles before retiring from competitive golf at age 20. In the meantime, Shinnecock Hills's founders hired the great Stanford White to build a clubhouse. It was finished in June 1892. White, a married man, led a scandalous private life centered around a secret Manhattan apartment adorned with a red velvet swing. Among his many mistresses was Evelyn Nesbit, a 16-year-old chorus girl. Soon after breaking up with White, she married railroad and mining heir Harry Thaw, who flew into a rage upon learning of his young wife's affair with White. On the night of June 25, 1906, Thaw gunned down the "swinging architect" during a musical in Madison Square Garden, a building White had designed. Later that summer, Shinnecock Hills hired its third Scottish golf pro, 25-year-old Charlie was a feisty, affectionate teacher who reigned for more than half a century, until being succeeded in 1962 by Don McDougal, the current pro. Thom lived on the grounds, in a small cottage near the 14th tee that still doubles as the pro shop, until his death in 1978. The 14th hole is now called "Thom's Elbow." During Thom's long tenure, the golf course evolved under the watch of three renowned architects. In 1916, the club bought 50 additional acres and commissioned C.B. Macdonald and his protege Seth Raynor to lay out six new holes to replace those that crossed the Long Island Rail Road train tracks; the railroad had demanded that the club post a bond indemnifying it against any injuries to players and others. The 6,108-yard, par-70 Macdonald-Raynor design remained intact until plans for a new highway again forced the club to rebuild. William Flynn was hired to build the present course. Flynn's layout officially opened July 1, 1931, and incorporated Macdonald's original Redan a par 5 that now form the green complex of today's par-3 2nd. Shinnecock Indians continued to play key roles in construction and maintenance at Shinnecock Hills. In 1956 Elmer Smith, a Shinnecock whose father had worked on Macdonald's grounds crew, took over as superintendent. Smith died of a heart attack in 1980 and was succeeded by his son Peter. A Dartmouth College graduate and single-digit-handicapper, Peter Smith helped set up the course for the 1986 and 1995 U.S. Opens. In the fall of 1999, however, Shinnecock Hills forced out Smith, hired Pebble Beach superintendent Mark Michaud, and spent heavily on new maintenance facilities and equipment. The club's relationship with the Shinnecock tribe ran aground like the Circassian. No Shinnecock Hills members will comment publicly, but it is clear that the greens committee was dissatisfied with Smith's work on the course between U.S. Opens. Smith's supporters say he was hamstrung by a low budget and possibly hurt by racial discrimination. After hooking on as superintendent of the Foxwoods of a heart attack at age 47. Today there are about 600 members of the Shinnecock tribe living on a reservation less than a mile from Shinnecock Hills. A few still work at the club -- several are caddies -- but some Shinnecocks are angry. Politically charged animosity resurfaced last year when the USGA decided to relocate U.S. Open parking areas from Shinnecock land to privately owned farmland, costing the tribe tens of thousands of dollars. Don't be surprised if you hear cries of protest behind the sounds of cheering galleries at this year's Open. Illustration B/W PHOTO: SUFFOLK COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY Ladies' club championship, circa 1900 B/W PHOTO: SUFFOLK COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY Shinnecock's Stanford White clubhouse B/W PHOTO Willie Dunn's workshop //
Q Your house is on fire. You can grab one thing as you race for the door. What is it? A My daughter, my car keys, and some wine. All the Australian reds I can hog-carry out the door. Q Five points off -- we said "one thing." Next: It's karaoke night. The lights dim. The crowd chants "Apples! Apples!" Your song of choice is... A "Love Is in the Air." That's classic Barry White, right? No, wait -- Air Supply's "Lost in Love." Q How very sad for you. What talent would you secretly love to have? A The same talent every male would secretly love to have. Q Who should play you in the movie based on your life? A Who's that guy who's always in Ben Stiller movies? Q Ben Stiller? A Owen Wilson! How about him? Does he have a big enough head? Q No. Name one thing you suck at. A thing you've ever seen on a golf course is A Appleby's caddie, Joe Damiano, interjects: "How about those two baboons having sex in the second fairway at Sun City?" Appleby: "Did I see that?" Damiano: "Sure you did -- we were on the second green." OK, I guess it's baboons having sex, then. Q What would you say to the following fellow Aussies if you had the chance? Nicole Kidman. A "Can we go out on a date?" Q Greg Norman. A "Can I borrow your plane for the weekend? I'm taking Nicole Kidman out." Q What's the strangest thing you've ever been asked to autograph? A A female breast. Q As opposed to a male breast? If you could have any super power, what would it be? A X-ray vision. Every man wants x-ray vision. WIN A SET OF COBRA IRONS! Be that guy with "great imagination, tees and balls for a chance to win new irons! One of the best compliments you can receive in golf is that you show" great imagination "-- like that time you got up and down from the parking lot by banking one off the halfway house. We'd like to see what kind of imagination you really have, so here's the challenge. Create a work of art using three, and only three, ingredients: golf balls, tees and peanut butter. (No PB &J; swirl, please -- that stuff is gross!) What should you make? Anything you like, Leonardo Da Skippy: a vase, a candlestick holder, a life-size likeness of Jason Gore (better use extra-crunchy). Then take a photo and send it our way. The most inspired entry wins its creator a brand new set of King Cobra 3400 I/XH Inertia Series irons (above). Remember: Stick to the three components, and whatever you do, please don't ship us the mad about the tuna-and-skunk sandwiches we ordered out of a catalog last month. - Reply by Nov. 7 to: **26;1853;TOOLONG (subject: "Art Contest") or mail photos to Art Contest, c/o Golf Magazine, 2 Park Ave., 10th Floor, New York, NY 10016. Turn to page 175 for the contest rules. NEXT MONTH - Q &A; with Jason Gore - Holiday wish list - The Golf crossword puzzle - Much more! Illustration PHOTO: ACTION IMAGES DIGIITAL TWO PHOTOS ILLUSTRATION: Steve Moore In the rough "That" it! I did it! I finally figured out how to hit the perfect golf shot every single time!! "//
It's an exciting time to be involved in snowboarding, but it's also terribly confusing. This is one of most innovative and dynamic sports in the world. A tad too innovative and dynamic, perhaps. Equipment designers disagree on just about everything -- board shape, binding mounting methods, soft boots or hard boots, plate bindings or soft bindings -- the list goes on. To snowboarding neophytes, these terms may mean nothing. But to the snowboarding industry, "inserts" and "retention plates" are fightin' words. Part of the problem is youthful enthusiasm. The whole snowboarding industry is only about 12 years old, and sometimes it still seems like a toddler excitedly trying out its newly discovered motor skills and getting a little carried away. Alpine skiing, ski mountaineering, skateboarding, athletic shoes, even silverware -- influences from all these can be seen in equipment design. The result is a dizzying array of technical concepts that can easily intimidate would-be snowboard consumers. You've heard of personal trainers; well, you practically need a personal scene. The days when you could simply walk into a store and ask to buy a snowboard are gone. Now you must choose between an "Alpine" board for carving turns, an all-around "freeriding" model, or a trick-oriented "freestyle" board. Then you have to choose among the various shapes that boards come in. Symmetrical or asymmetrical? Asymmetrical? Okay, which one: the kind where the sidecuts are shifted or the kind where the heelside sidecut is deeper? Or maybe you'd like this nice symmetrical board with the asymmetrical core? You get the picture. And we haven't begun to discuss boots and bindings. All this raises the inevitable question: Should equipment options be simplified to mitigate the intimidation factor on consumers? In a word, yes. But until then, think of SKIING as your personal tech rep. After giving boards the bulk of their R &D; attention over the past decade, designers are turning their attention to creating boot/binding systems that are more reliable, background. There are two different types of boot/binding systems. Adapted from Alpine and ski mountaineering boots, stiff plastic hardshell boots are used with plate bindings (the "hard" system) and provide maximum support for racers and Alpine-oriented riders who just like to carve turns. Soft-shell boots are worn with highback bindings (the "soft" system), and because they allow more forward and lateral flex, they're the choice of most freestyle snowboarders. Their degree of support can vary significantly, depending on how hard the plastic is on the lower portion of the boot. In the past, snowboarders have been faced with a cut-and-dried choice between hard and soft boots. Ironically, a clothing manufacturer -- Ocean Pacific -- has taken the most aggressive step in bridging the gap between the two. Designed with the input of freeriding idol Damian Sanders, OP's Damian Tech boot ($259) is said to combine the flexibility of a soft boot with the convenience and carving precision of a hard one. (For "on page 59.) This unique boot has a stiff plastic lower shell that can be worn with a plate binding, but the rest of the boot looks like a soft boot cross-pollinated with a highback binding. It has soft-boot features, such as a leather lace-up upper, as well as binding features like shin and ankle straps (the latter is a ratcheted strap that wraps over the forefoot) and a stiff plastic highback mounted at the rear of the boot for support on heel-side turns. Another innovative approach comes from Sportsystem, the European boot and binding maker for Sims and Santa Cruz. Sportsystem has developed a soft boot that can claim two firsts: It's rear-entry (i.e., it laces up the back, not the front), and it can be "pumped up" like a Reebok sneaker. Called the Airliner by Santa Cruz and the Inflator by Sims (both are $270), the boot features an air compressor and release valve on the bladder tongue that allow the rider to fit. "Ski boot giant Nordica has entered the snowboarding market with two unique designs. Its SBS soft boot ($335) has a water-repellent zippered gaiter attached to a soft polyurethane cuff. Its three-buckle SBH ($370) is an overlap-type hard-shell boot with adjustable forward and lateral flex and a "ride/walk" switch that releases the back for walking, not unlike the "ski/walk" feature on some ski boots. BINDINGS To understand the latest binding developments, you have to understand how bindings are attached to boards. This issue is one of the most politically charged brouhahas in the industry. Again, more background. Snowboard bindings are mounted onto snowboards via two different anchoring systems: retention plates or threaded inserts. The retention-plate system is like that of skis: Holes are drilled through the topsheet of the board where the bindings will be placed, and self-tapping binding screws (i.e., ones that don't require nuts) are coated with epoxy glue and then screwed into an aluminum or ABS retention plate sandwiched within the snowboard comes with threaded mounting holes built right in. Usually the number of mounting holes in the board is greater than the number needed to actually hold the binding to board, giving the rider a variety of binding positions -- and therefore stances -- to choose from. Virtually all companies offer some models with inserts. Of the major players, Kemper, Morrow, Rossignol, and Aggression go exclusively with retention plates. The main advantage of retention plates, as they will tell you, is the unlimited choice of binding positions. The main disadvantage: To change the binding position, you must drill new holes in the board, which can ultimately weaken it. Using threaded inserts does offer the option of removing the binding or changing its position with just a screwdriver instead of a power drill, but if you want a stance angle or width that differs from the ones predetermined by a board's inserts, you're stuck. Also, the mounting screws can loosen, so they must be checked on a You know how with ski bindings, any binding can be attached to any ski? It doesn't always work that way with snowboards. With retention plates you can mount any binding on any board. But with inserts, your binding must correspond to the hole pattern on the board. Usually this means buying the binding made by the same company -- which explains why almost every snowboard manufacturer also offers a binding, either under its own brand name or through a distribution deal with a binding maker. Okay, here's where it gets interesting. Burton, the market-share leader in all equipment categories, has always been committed to inserts. Over the past few seasons, Nitro, LaMar, Lib Tech, and Barfoot, among others, have placed insert patterns in their boards that match the insert pattern used on Burton boards and bindings. Thus, Burton bindings could be used on their boards, and vice versa. Not exactly standardization, but it was better than nothing. This season Burton has thrown a and replaced it with its new 3D Interface Connection. The baseplate of each of Burton's three binding models (one hard, two soft) is now fitted with a rotatable disk that is anchored to the board via three screws. Burton says it created the 3D Interface Connection for two reasons. Placing the screws nearer the center of the board, under the midfoot instead of at the toes ("central mounting"), creates less interference with the board's flex pattern. In addition, making the binding rotatable combines the infinite stance options of a retention plate with the adjustability of an insert system. According to Burton's math, the 3D Interface Connection allows 2,073,600 possible stances, with screwdriver-adjustable stance angles, stance width, boot centering, canting, heel lift, and toe lift. Skeptics wonder if the three screws can safely hold a binding onto a board (most other bindings use four or five), and whether the toe and/or heel area of the binding will lift off the board during of the board. If it's any consolation, we tested the 3D plate bindings in our'' 93 board test and sensed no apparent lift. Here's the rub. The 3D bindings will only fit the insert pattern found on the'' 92-'' 93 Burton boards. So if you want to put this season's Burton bindings on last season's Burton board, or on a board made by any other manufacturer, you're out of luck. Still, centrally mounted "rotating disk" binding systems could be the wave of the future. In fact, two other companies -- Sportsystem and F2 (a European sail-board company) -- offer their own versions. BOARDS When it comes to snowboard shape, design concepts are flying around like shrapnel from an exploding fragmentation bomb. (For a rundown on shapes, see "Choose Your Weapon" on page 146.) In general, look for more one-piece cap constructions, versatile freeriding boards, and skateboard-inspired shapes. Lib Tech, a introduced the first "cap" snowboards in 1990, the same season Salomon debuted its cap ski. Now more companies are looking to wraparound construction for lighter weight and improved durability. Nitro's new Jeff Davis Cerro freestyle model is built in the Elan factory with the same construction as Elan's MBX ski. And F2, now in its second year of U.S. snowboard distribution, incorporates a "Monocoque" technology (hmmm, does Salomon know about this?) in its Beamer World Cup ($584 without bindings). Expect more companies to be thinking caps in the future. Alpine racing designs have traditionally received the most R &D; attention, and technological advances made in them are trickling down to freeriding and freestyle shapes. The result: versatile boards with high-powered, race-influenced performance. One of the most intriguing developments on this front is the Internal Asymmetric Shift (IAS) from Santa Cruz. Available in 156- and 165-cm lengths ($464 and $466, without bindings), IAS boards incorporate an asymmetric wood core Cruz, is a board with both the stability of symmetrical shapes and the snappy edge changes of asymmetrical models with offset sidecuts. Companies can't agree on whether symmetrical or asymmetrical boards are better, but just about everyone agrees that you must sell both to stay competitive. K2, a longtime devotee of symmetrical designs, has introduced its first asymmetrical model -- the limited-edition DC 162 slalom board ($465 without bindings). Specialization can extend even to flex patterns. Not only does Nitro offer both symmetrical and asymmetrical Alpine boards (the Amero and Epic, respectively), but it also is making some lengths available in a choice of either a soft flex for lighter riders or a stiffer flex for more aggressive or heavier riders. If you're looking for one board that will take you anywhere -- and that's most of us -- check out one of the new breed of freeriding boards, which are rapidly becoming the flagships of most manufacturers' lines. Essentially, the freeriding category is equivalent to all-terrain skis freestyle-type models in both asymmetrical and symmetrical shapes. Burton, for example, subdivides its freeriding line into Alpine and freestyle categories. Skiers should look into the Alpine-oriented M-Series. Though the asymmetrical M5.0 and M6.0 ($470 with bindings) carve less powerfully than Burton's PJ race models, their slightly wider waists, softer flex, and less extreme asymmetrical offset make them much more versatile in bumps and powder. The freestyle-oriented X-Class boards, consisting of the Asym Air 5 and Asym Air 6 ($570 with bindings), can't match the M-series in carving, but with a soft flex pattern and an upturned ("kicked") tip and tail, the Asym Airs are more suitable for riding fakie (backwards) and in the halfpipe. Skateboarding has always had a major influence on snowboard design, but as specialization has taken hold over the past few years, that influence has become limited to freestyle boards -- which is logical, since these boards are most at home doing tricks in the halfpipe, winter new example is Morrow's SP (Spoon Nose) series ($549-$559, without bindings). The two SP boards have a scooped-out nose and tail (hey, like a spoon) resembling those of current skateboards. Morrow claims that this shape opens up an entire range of skatelike tricks in the halfpipe; another benefit is that the nose and tail edges won't catch on the lip of the pipe so readily -- just in case that ranks high on your list of concerns (or your kid's). CHOOSE YOUR WEAPON What is the "best" shape for a snowboard? Throw this issue to a roundtable of snowboard designers and you'll find about as much agreement among candidates at a Presidential debate. But one thing is certain: One shape will better suit your needs than the others. It all depends on your personal riding style: Alpine carving, all-around freeriding, or halfpipe. The industry does agree on the three basic snowboard shapes. One is symmetrical; the other two are ways. Here are the specifics. Symmetrical. If you cut a symmetrical board in half from tip to tail, each half would be identical, a mirror image of the other (Fig. 1). (Figure 1 omitted) This is the most user-friendly design, suitable for everyone from beginners to World Cup competitors, who win races on symmetrical boards as often as on asyms. The symmetrical shape is applied to all model categories, from Alpine racing to freeriding and freestyle boards. Symmetricals are generally more stable, more predictable, and more forgiving, but reputedly less quick edge to edge than asyms. Which brings us to .... The original asym. Take a symmetrical board, cut it down the middle from tip to tail, and shift the heelside half back several centimeters (Fig. 2). (Figure 2 omitted) This is the basic geometry of an asym board with "shifted" sidecuts. Asyms were created in the mid '80s to compensate for a snowboarder's inherently asymmetrical stance much pressure on their heelside edges, they find it harder to carve a turn on that side. This is solved by aligning the center of the sidecuts under the feet for equally efficient turns on the toe and heel sides. Shifting the sidecuts also automatically moves a rider's hips -- and center of mass -- back, which means less fore-aft movement over the board, making riding an asym less work. Under ideal situations -- a groomed slope and the ability to carve flawless, razor-sharp turns -- an asym board will ride quicker and carve better than a symmetrical board; this quickness, however, also translates into a high-strung, less forgiving, less versatile board. Even the new asym freestyle boards, which have a lesser degree of offset, are more demanding than symmetrical boards. The other asym. Take a symmetrical board and give the heelside edge a deeper sidecut. Now you have the second type of asymmetrical shape (Fig. 3). (Figure 3 omitted) This shape first appeared a couple goal is the same as that of its shifty cousin: to make heelside turns easier. This type of asym shape tends to be used in freestyle boards because it works best with the relatively flat stance favored by freestyle riders (i.e., a stance with the feet across the board or angled slightly forward). Alpine boards work best with a more forward stance. Also, quite a few models are "reversible"; i.e., they have identical tip and tail shapes (symmetrical, whaddaya know), thus allowing the choice of a regular stance (left foot forward) or a goofy stance (right foot forward) by simply reversing the bindings. With the shifted asyms, which tend to have distinctly different nose and tail shapes, two versions, regular and goofy, must be manufactured.
You know something is seriously wacky when a ski competition starts with a debate led by people who ski to the edge of death for a living, and when the voice of reason turns out to be the greatest hot dog who ever lived. Sure enough, the first-ever World Technical Skiing Championships at Blackcomb, British Columbia, turned into a circus of world-class wackiness. When you set out on one of the most impossible missions of all time -- to establish conclusively the two best all-around skiers, man and woman, in the world -- what else would you expect? What took place were three days of impudent weather and boisterous debate; three days of impromptu comedy and questionable judging; three days of uniformly brilliant, often inventive, and sometimes downright slapstick skiing. In short, three of the wackiest days ever to pass in the name of serious skiing competition. Conceived as a six-event test of all-around skiing ability, the World Technical Championships certainly looked reasonable enough on paper. Three events aimed to determine technical proficiency in short-radius turns, medium-radius turns, and in specific disciplines: an extreme run down Blackcomb's renowned Couloir Extreme (a.k.a. Saudan Couloir), a GS race, and a mogul run. Bring together top guns from skiing's various competitive battlefields -- racing, freestyle, extreme skiing, powder skiing, "demonstration" skiing, and so on -- and let 'em have at it. It seemed a perfectly reasonable way to settle the best-all-around issue. It wasn't. All pretense at reason was squashed at a meeting the evening before the first day of competition. The event's director, Doug Perry, and the panel of five judges presented what they assumed would be a quick and simple -- and very reasonable -- review of the event's format, scoring rules, and schedule. But they underestimated a five-foot-three-inch verbal hurricane by the name of Noel Lyons, the 1993 World Extreme Skiing Champion. She started by asking quite possibly the kookiest question ever asked in reference to skiing, which was: "Is it bigger than a bread medium-radius turn, and the judges, understandably clueless as to whether a medium-radius turn is or is not of bread-box proportions, indicated that they'd get to that question later. Which they didn't. Things quickly got worse. In the couloir, Perry said, all competitors would be expected to ski a front-and-center line. This got the extremists rightfully hot and bothered; Doug Coombs and Eric DesLauriers joined Lyons in lambasting Perry and the judges for their wimpy approach to the extreme portion of the competition. Pretty soon Steve Mahre was up at the front of the room strutting his best Clarence Darrow stuff, stumping for a change in the way GS race times would be converted into points as part of each competitor's overall score, and, what the hell, why not a complete revamping of the whole scoring format in general? The judges were looking battle-weary, and the competition hadn't even begun. That's when Wayne Wong, who back in the '70s was the most audaciously creative hot calmly urged everybody to chill out. He suggested ever-so-calmly to Perry and the judges that they at least consider a change in the scoring. Which they didn't. So the meeting ended with unanimous agreement on only one critical point: Wayne Wong is still one of the coolest guys in all of skiing. Mike Farny knows a thing or two about how to approach an event like this. He's a former winner of the All Japan Technical Skiing Championships, the 31-year-old big kahuna of "technical" skiing competitions. (The World Technicals were patterned, approximately but loosely, after Japanese technical-skiing events.) Farny had come as a spectator rather than a competitor, and he had sensible words of advice for those who were competing. "The point is not to try to win," he said. "The point is to show the judges and the public what you can do well." Right. Which is why every one of the 53 men and women who showed up for the competition -- was trying to figure out what to do to win. In other words, what were the judges looking for? The official judging criteria were (1) ski performance -- getting the ski to perform to its full design potential; (2) efficiency of movement; and (3) speed. Fair enough, but beyond the tissue-thin decoupage of the announced criteria lay an undefined no-man's-land for the judges to flounder in. Which they did. You couldn't blame them; stuck in an utterly thankless job, with little precedence as a guide, and having never judged an event quite like this, they were winging it. The scores ranged between 192 and 260, with a maximum of 300 possible. This distribution created the illusion of a painstaking, algorithmic process, as if several variables had been carefully considered. But when asked for a scoring breakdown, Olle Larsson -- race coach, technical expert, and one of the judges -- explained that only "an overall impression" was the basis judges "mantra in stonewalling any questions (of which there were many) about the scoring. It was more mysticism than judging, and in that light, a bread box seemed as worthy a judging standard as any other. Consider the outcome of the first event, the test of medium-radius turning. Felix McGrath, the former U.S. Ski Team slalom specialist, laid down arcs that looked suspiciously like slalom turns, of which a baker's dozen could have fit in a bread box. His score ended up third best. Pro racer Mathias Berthold let loose with magnificently oversized Super G turns, each certainly several bread boxes' worth. He earned the second-highest score. Then along came Marc Garcia, former French national teamer and former pro racer, his tete raffishly swathed in a neon bandana. Garcia etched the slope with smooth, economical, and energetic turns measuring about halfway between the Berthold and McGrath standards -- and placed first. A veteran star of the Japanese tech-skiing wars, Garcia seemed to have a proper relationship between a bread box and the theoretical medium-radius norm. Meanwhile, among the women, Noel Lyons finished next to last in what shaped up as a gruesome day in a gruesome competition for extreme skiers. Among the men, DesLauriers tied for 28th (out of 40 skiers), Coombs tied for 36th. In the afternoon's short-radius event, DesLauriers finished next to last, Coombs dead last. The extreme camp was a mix of humility, commiseration, anger, and eventually ironic humor. When Coombs finally nudged out DesLauriers by one point in the mixed-radius event the next morning -- the two were still 37th and 38th, respectively -- he pronounced, "I smoked you!" The extremists thought they were getting jobbed by the judges, and maybe they were. But for all of the mystical inconsistencies in the scoring, the judges deserved considerable credit for getting right the matter that counted most: In this three-pronged test of technical precision, Garcia and Christa Hartmann (member of the Austrian national of Georg Hollrigl, one of the event's judges) were the indisputable top dogs. Only McGrath, his skis so far apart that you could have fit a basketball between them, and former U.S. Ski Team star Tamara McKinney came close. What was disputable, however, and wacky as well, was the scoring in the couloir event, which took place in the afternoon of the second day. Out of the snow squalls and hail and misery and clowning and trepidation and rule-breaking that marked this bizarre "extreme" contest, in what was supposed to be the most daringly, thrillingly free-form event of the championships, Garcia and Hartmann emerged on top again -- by skiing with such clinical conservatism as to squeeze new meaning into the word "technical." That only gave new gusto to the question that hung like a haze over the three days of competition: What was this event really all about? Its title proclaimed it to be a technical championship, yet it reached for much higher ground than that was to crown not just the world's best technical skiers but the world's best skiers. Period. Such a lofty ambition could only beg an obvious and troublesome question: What is the mythical ideal? Put another way: What talents should distinguish the world's best all-around skiers? Make clean, efficient turns of any size, bigger and smaller than a bread box. Ski fast without any perceptible loss of control or fear. Smoke through moguls. Ski steeps unhesitatingly and aggressively. These things, at any rate, composed the World Technical ideal. Well and good -- but what constitutes smoking the moguls or conquering the steeps? Such notions are open to many interpretations. The judging, and disenchantment with the judging, was proving that. These interpretations are further complicated by inevitable questions of balance, e.g.: Is the guy who is brilliant on a racecourse but only fair in moguls a better all-around skier than the master of the moguls with middling racecourse times? Consider also a question the World Technicals skiers be fearless and acrobatic aerialists? Finally, consider matters most ticklish of all, questions of pure aesthetics: Shouldn't the world's best all-around skiers demonstrate such intangibles as joy, elegance, lightness, imagination, flair, and even humor? If you're capable of devising a formula to answer such questions beyond a shadow of argumentation, then you would have been a deathly and unwelcome bore at the World Technical Skiing Championships. Because half the fun of the championships was not the competition itself, but the unending stream of discussion about the competition -- what it could be, should be, might be, might have been. As April wound into May, the restaurants, bars, hotel rooms, and sundecks of Blackcomb were filled with high-minded, beer-bolstered debates that twisted themselves into knots of irresolution. Wayne Wong observed, "This is as crazy as the early days of freestyle." Crazy, as in crazy with talk and ideas and more talk spinning late into the night, crazy with Championships, for all of its ambiguities and shortcomings, had the promise and potential to turn into something really big. But what, exactly? Opinions came and went furiously. Ove Nygren, the motorcycle-racing man-child of the U.S. Pro Tour, was among the air-happy honchos who thought the event should include a gelandesprung. (Not a bad idea.) Many competitors thought that three precision-turning events amounted to overkill, even if precision-turning most closely fit the definition of a "technical skiing" championship. Nobody, of course, cared for the judging, even the judges, but could anyone have reasonably expected the sudden, miraculous intervention of a better scoring idea? It took freestyle years to hammer out a code of objective judging standards, and it continues to be tweaked. Why should the World Technicals be expected to get things right in the first burst out of the blocks? And above the frenzied disharmony of ideas invariably rose the descant voice of Noel Lyons, still inconsolably irate that the couloir contest was a it something else," she said, in a voice edgy with defiance, "but don't call it extreme." Wayne Wong wasn't so sure about that. Sitting in front of the Horstman Hut at Blackcomb's summit, Wong had been watching the fast-moving curtain of a fierce squall obscure glaciers and high ridges in gray blankness. "I just don't want to bite it," said Wong about his upcoming tussle with the couloir, worrying that, regardless of whatever Noel Lyons might think, the couloir could be plenty extreme, especially if it started hailing. Which, at that moment, it did. Even so, Lyons had a point. The center of the couloir, where the competitors were expected to do their thing, had seen so much traffic that it had become a long stairway of boulder-sized, boulder-hard moguls. Furthermore, the competitors had been asked, prior to the event, to sideslip the course in order to pack down loose snow from recent storms. Lyons every competitor agreed. Extreme? A well-packed mogul run? You got ta be kidding. The only extreme element left was the weather, which for some skiers was more than enough. Snow squalls, flat light, hail -- the bad-weather luck of some competitors might indeed turn a packed mogul run into an extreme free-fall of blind terror. Not for Doug Lewis, who never met a wacky idea he wouldn't consider seriously. Hopelessly buried in the standings, the former U.S. Team downhiller had given up on trying to please the judges. He was going to have some fun. So he skied far off course to make silly faces for a camera crew, then blitzed the last third of the couloir in a full tuck. He capped his run by snapping off one ski at the finish and melodramatically thrusting it over his head in the cliched victory gesture of World Cup racing. It was such goofball stuff that you just had to love it. Which the judges didn't. DesLauriers and Coombs felt to ski wonderfully dreadnought lines through the cliff bands and chutes along the couloir's edge, and the hell with the rules. They wee going with the Mike Farny principle: Show the world your best stuff. Something very right was beginning to happen in this extreme event. Coombs' and DesLauriers' imagination, surefootedness, and deft skill at finding lines through the rocks drew loud cheers from the competitors and spectators at the top of the couloir. Among them, Mathias Berthold murmured approval, expressing the respect that had been building throughout the competition between racers and extremists. But you'd assume the judges would not be so appreciative. Which they weren't. Steve Mahre, drawing a lucky few minutes of sunshine, had the run of the afternoon -- a wide-arcing mambo of incomparable grace and speed, featuring the power carving and rock-solid, cantilevered balance that are hallmarks of a classic Mahre turn. Short turns, long turns, in and out of the fall line, all at high speed -- if "this was it. In a perfect world where righteousness rules, that would have been the top-scoring run. Which it wasn't. Garcia's clinical run was. And in a perfect world, the women's event, beset by weather misery, would have been canceled. At one point, the sad, lonesome figure of Katie Harvey, champion in the 24 Hours of Aspen marathon, stood frozen in the starting gate, waiting 30 minutes for a squall to pass. At another point, the sad, lonesome figure of Janice Morgan, member of Canada's national demonstration team, rolled like tumbleweed through the heart of the couloir. (She was unhurt.) And from somewhere out of the ill-tempered weather and the loss of enthusiasm and the specter of imminent hypothermia and the gloom of a fast-encroaching evening appeared Christa Hartmann, a beatific light of imperturbability, skiing her way to a clinically winning run. "You can't worry," said Hartmann, about any of the distractions -- the. "You just ski." Indeed, all worries did seem to dissipate for the next morning's race, because racing is simple: Just ski, and do so in a hurry. No judging to misscore the racing skill and instincts of Tamara McKinney, who matter-of-factly blew away the women's field. From the starting corral, the competitors, both men and women, hung over the sponsors' banners to watch in open awe as McKinney sped effortlessly from one gate to the next. "Man, she's really hauling!" said one of the men, slack-jawed. It was something to see. No judging to misconstrue the obvious message on the men's side: This was an event for pro racers to dominate. Mathias Berthold, Felix McGrath, Ove Nygren, and Jim Read -- pro racers all -- were the top four finishers. The mutual-admiration tables were turned; Coombs was expressing his appreciation for the gate-crashing skills of Berthold and company. And, perhaps regrettably, there was through the gates with the liquid and untroubled ease of butterscotch melting on a sundae. Wong finished dead last. A little butterscotch ought to go into the best all-around mix, don't you think, but how in the world do you measure something like that? Thankfully, wackiness returned for the mogul event that afternoon. It began with -- what else -- a mercurial change in the weather, as the morning chill gave way to a sudden assault of spring warmth. In the morning the moguls of Catskinner had been, as Katie Harvey said, "a coral reef," but by afternoon they resembled something more like a giant Slurpee. So who astonished the crowd with the nimble, quick-turning reflexes of a regular mogul-meister? Why, none other than speed skier Franz Weber, renowned for a hell-bent propensity not to turn. If he hadn't got his quick feet briefly and ignobly bogged in the mush, he might have won the mogul event. How wacky is that? Or how about Meinhard the photograph-still upper body, finishing fifth in the moguls (and seventh overall)? Taschl gave credence to an idea wholly far-fetched just a few days earlier: The world's best all-around skiers do not necessarily have two arms. But really, how about that Steve Mahre? He'd come to the mogul event inspired by an admirably off-the-wall ambition: He was going to pull off a helicopter, even if it killed him. Which it nearly did. A third of the way into his run, the erratically whirlybirding Mahre took off on a crash course with the retaining fence. Spectators fled ground zero like frightened deer. But he got his skis pointed downhill and managed to avoid the fence by inches. It must have reminded Wayne Wong of the crazy, early days of freestyle. Who would have thought: Steve Mahre, world's best hot dog. And finally, there was Garcia, about to be crowned world technical champ (along with the ever-smiling Hartmann), but pouting over his score for the best skier in the world, "the pre-event press releases had called the championships. What a nobly hopeless endeavor! The best skier in the world is an elusive figment -- a phantom lost in the mists of a zillion differing opinions. You might as well launch a search for Superman or Morgan le Fay. Still, the World Technicals was a breath of fresh air in the world of skiing competition. This was indeed, as Wayne Wong said, like the early days of freestyle, before freestyle started taking itself too seriously. It was basically, as Mike Farny suggested, a showcase for brilliant skiers to show off, and what could be much better than that? Long live any forum in which Steve Mahre and Meinhard Taschl and Franz Weber and Noel Lyons and Tamara McKinney -- and whoever -- can break from established competitive reputations and demonstrate the unrevealed breadth of their talents. But a way of discovering the world's best skier? Not a chance. That's just a flat-out wacky for the world's best skier without Alberto Tomba? Or Tommy Moe? Or other World Cup stars like Kjeti Andre Aamodt, Marc Girardelli, Breni Schneider, or Katja Seizinger? Without extreme stars Scot Schmidt or Glen Plake? Where were those guys? * Politics and money -- the twin movers and shakers of the modern world -- had a lot to do with the notable absence of many of the world's top skiers at this year's World Technicals. * The politics: The Federation Internationale de Ski (FIS), the controlling body of the World Cup, hinted strongly that racers who competed in the World Technicals, an event for which the FIS was not the sanctioning body, risked future World Cup eligibility. The one World Cup racer who had already been entered -- U.S. GS star Eva Twardokens -- promptly withdrew. * Beyond the sanctioning question was a second stumbling block, says World Technicals director Doug Perry. The FIS has a sour opinion of the World Technicals' "factory team" format ski companies (Elan, K2, Rossignol, Salomon, etc.) that sponsor them. * The money: The Technicals offered no prize money. Instead, the organizers relied on the equipment sponsors to field (i.e., pay, compensate) their factory teams. Schmidt and Plake were absent because their ski sponsor, K2, chose to enter only three skiers. The company deemed Doug Coombs and Steve and Phil Mahre to "have the best chance of doing well in an event like this," says president Tim Petrick (Phil was subsequently hurt in a water-skiing accident and didn't compete). Other top skiers were also left out by their sponsors. So money, or the lack of it, was responsible for the absence of World Cuppers and non-World Cuppers alike. * Perry hopes to eliminate these barriers for 1995. Bolstered by what most competitors and onlookers agreed was a successful first event with a promising future, Perry is actively pursuing FIS sanction, considering even the possibility of FIS oversight of happens on that front, changes are in store for the World Technicals of 1995. One of the three technical-turning events (most competitors felt there were too many of these) will be replaced with what Perry calls "a real crowd-pleaser" -- an event incorporating big GS turns, moguls, and big air in one run. * The judging, and the understanding of the judging, should also be better. Perry concedes that the criteria may not have been fully understood, both by competitors and judges. As a result, each factory team will be supplied with a videotape for a visual explanation of the criteria, and the addition of pre-event "practice judging sessions" should help get judges and competitors on the same wavelength.
AND OTHER INANITIES OF CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING. BY MICHAEL FINKEL // Maybe it's the cross-country skis that get my goat. Are the things filled with helium, or what? If you so much as look at a crosscountry ski the wrong wav, it's liable to snap in two. Call me crazy, but I like my ski gear to have some heft. It makes me feel rugged, virile. The latest trend in X-C skis, though, is to make them even shorter and lighter. Pretty soon, I'm convinced, we'll be able to store a couple of pairs in the glove box. Perhaps use 'em to floss with. And the boots. I don't know about you, but I've never been tempted to get out there on a cold January day and stick my feet into shoes that appear to have all the warmth of a wet paper bag. Don't tell me about DuPont this or Gore-Tex that. I've been to the shops. Top-of-the-line cross-country boots look suspiciously like Chuck Taylors. Then there I'll concede that there's something undeniably audacious about skiing around with a set of jousting lances. That is, until you stumble forward and smash your teeth on the grip of one. Recently, I expressed these reservations to some acquaintances who are diehard cross-country skiers. (All of them, by the way, are bone thin, with sunken eyes, elbows that could pick locks, and doleful demeanors-a look that, at least to me, brings to mind Mahatma Gandhi, midfast.) They listened to my complaints, then heaped scorn upon me. "Pain is good!" they shouted. "Slow is soulful," they bellowed. "Flat is phat!" they clamored. So last winter, when the conditions went to ice at my usual downhill spot, I donned a skintight outfit worthy of a Vegas revue, drove to a local cross-country area, rented gear, and gave the sport a try. I completed a 10-kilometer loop, in-line style, which means there was to stick my skis into and pole away. By the time I was halfway around, I think I qualified as an intermediate. It was excellent exercise, I confess, and there was a sort of Zen element about it. In fact, I came up with several crosscountry koans: What is the sound of one nostril running? If a hamstring snaps in the forest, will anybody hear it? How is it that people are able to ingest banana-flavored PowerBars on a frigid day? And I learned why crosscountry skiers are in such good shape. Wearing a skimpy outfit and sweating like a fry cook means that if you stop-even just long enough to take a pee-you'll find yourself in the latter stages of deep freeze. But in terms of adrenal stimulation, I'd have to place cross-country skiing somewhere between flipping an omelet and tying my shoelaces. The scariest part of the day was wearing my stretchy getup into a bar. (I've noticed that there's no such thing as a cross-country I again met with my cross-country pals. I told them of my unenlightening experience. A great sadness descended upon them, for I was not a convert. "You must try the backcountry!" one insisted. "You must smell the forest!" wailed another. "You must slide upon untrammeled earth!" insisted a third. I was instructed to visit the Holy Grail of cross-country adventure: Yellowstone National Park. And so I went. I convinced my girlfriend, also a cross-country conscientious objector, to join me, and we planned a three-day trip into the vast interior of the park. Right off, I learned that cross-country skiing while wearing a heavy backpack feels about as natural as playing the piano while wearing mittens. All the gentle nuances of movement essential for balance upon my skittery, edgeless X-C skis were lost, replaced by flailing, herky-jerky motions, my various limbs performing break-dance-style moves. As for the supposedly splendiferous joy of creating one's own tracks through virgin forest, allow trail was exhausting at best. Far worse, in places where the snowpack was weak, we broke through the surface and sank in to our hips. Then we struggled as though caught in quicksand, forced to jettison both pack and poles so we could fight our way back to terra a bit more firma. The uphills were brutal-those fish-scale thingies on the bottom of our skis ("waxless," the rental man boasted) had all the stickiness of a Post-it note. The downhills, on the other hand, were terrifying. You might think that a small downward incline would produce a scrap of speediness that might actually inject the sport with a modicum of unchecked merriment. Not so. The appropriate way to deal with undue acceleration while on cross-country skis, I've learned, is to promptly flop upon your derriere. At one time, had thought this butt-bounce technique was strictly for lesser-skilled cross-countryers. That was before I attended the Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway. There I learned how Olympic-caliber cross-country upon their derrieres or, perhaps a little more gracefully, upon their noses. Even the mighty Scandinavians did this. Their method for descending a hill on helium skis was to barrel straight down-no brakes. no steering, arms waving as if attempting flight-and then perform some sort of Pete Rose slide into the padded barrier at the bottom of the course, leap back up, and continue along the track. This, it turns out, is faster than snowplowing safely down a slope. We had planned to descend just like the Olympians-fast and straight. concluding with a butt flop. But instead of padded barriers, we were faced with a forest of lodgepole pines. Any adrenaline rush we may have experienced was swiftly replaced by a longing for motocross pads. Somehow, we both managed to get through the journey with our craniums uncracked, though I observed most of Yellow, stone's natural wonders with half my head buried in snow. During the three days, neither of us smiled once. It can't fair trial. And I concluded that cross-country skiing lacks a vital dimension. This missing dimension is the one that separates work from play. If Sisyphus' hill in Hades were covered with snow, he'd be wearing cross-country skis. That's my theory, and here's how I back it up: Proof one: While participating in their sport, cross-country skiers do not smile. Even the models on the covers of crosscountry skiing magazines look as if they're having about as much fun as sewer workers toiling on a hot day. Proof two: The sport has been shunned by the youthful fun-seeking masses. How many times have you seen cross-country skiing featured in an MTV video? A Mountain Dew commercial? A Nike ad? Have you ever spotted a Co-Ed Naked Cross-Country Skiing T-shirt? Proof three: Closeout sales at sporting goods stores always feature about 50 dozen sets of cross-country gear. I've seen skis marked down to something like 89 cents. Salesmen have offered me money to take the stuff. My heart goes out to all the hardcore crosscountry skiers across the nation. All 17 of them. These hardy souls, in their limegreen spandex leggings and cute, little sneakeresque booties, are the last of a suffering breed. While most of us wintertime sliders flock to the bump runs, or the halfpipe, or the steep and speedy groomers, cross-country skiers are busy poling their way around an endless catwalk. While the rest of us enjoy the warmth of warp-speed gondolas, or the heartiness of base-lodge victuals, crosscountryers are out there working their little tushes off and sucking down Gu. In this age of sneeze-length attention spans. of hyper-instant gratification and X-Games inanity, the folks on the helium skis with the lung power of Kenyan marathoners and the energy of amphetamine freaks are the pariahs of our time. They are guilty of the most unseemly of social taboos and are rarely invited to barbecues. Their crime? They knowingly and willingly participate in A Sport That Is Clearly Not Fun.
TO HONE THE FINE ART OF BUMP SKIING, NOTHING BEATS MACHINE-MADE MOGULS, ONE OF THE EAST'S LATEST SKI-AREA INNOVATIONS. BY MITCH KAPLAN // i skid to a halt and look downhill. Steep and gnarly doesn't begin to describe what I see. Terrifying might come close. The trail-wide, precipitously pitched, and called Grandstand-has the mumps. It's covered with bumps that are wild and randomly placed, as if they'd been hurled from a great height by evil snow gods. They lump up big as Volkswagens-with an icy showroom sheen-and are separated by deep, ski-bending fissures. Seen in the gray light of this overcast day, their shapes lack detail. But their murderous character is obvious. I look sheepishly at my pal and next-door neighbor, Lucky Abernathy. It's my fault we're here. I'm the bump nut, not him. But this is out of my league. Lucky, an advanced-intermediate skier at best, looks at me like his luck just ran out. I reluctantly give it a try. But my upper body-all, dragging my poles in a futile attempt at control. Each turn releases a cacophony of scrapes and crunches. I bounce like a rag doll over two or three of these nasty humps then throw myself into a turn. I do this for a full 10 minutes before I reach bottom (or is it hit bottom?). Lucky, meanwhile, has been sideslipping the whole deal. Finally safe, we ski off to the base lodge. We're scheduled to meet a guy named Dave, who's going to teach us about bump skiing. The timing is ripe. dave capron is a ski instructor and staff trainer here at Attitash Bear Peak in northern New Hampshire. Dave's promised to work with us just as he works with his ski pros-using one of Attitash's newest terrain innovations: machine-made moguls. Now, creating mogul fields with grooming machines isn't new. Indeed, machine-made bumps first gained notoriety during the 1992 Olympics at Albertville. When I watched Donna Wienbrecht take gold there, the perfectly shaped course. And many Eastern resorts-Killington and Sunday River in particular -- have long been machining their famous expert bump runs for mogul competitions. But building bumps on easier trails and using them to teach bump skiing is new. At Attitash they use a green-rated trail named Counselor's Run. Moderately broad and tree-lined, Counselor's descends lazily. An incredibly uniform mogul field, brimming with moderately sized, beautifully rounded bumps that are separated by smooth, welcoming troughs, undulates for its full length and breadth. Even ice-coated, these moguls beckon me seductively. "Pick a line," they seem to whisper, "you can't go wrong." Dave is explaining the basics of bump skiing to Lucky, but I can't control the itch. I dive in. So regular are these mounds that I hit the rhythm in the first two turns and keep it going for a dozen more. Neither the flat light nor the ice intimidates me. The lack of pitch frees me. I few fleeting seconds, I'm as good a bump skier as anyone. I yank myself from this ecstasy, stop, and look back to check on my friend. Lucky's knees are too stiff, and he's forgetting to use his poles, but he's moving through the bumps with a new eagerness. When he and Dave reach me, his face is one huge grin. Dave turns his attention to me. He tells me I look good-but there are things to correct. Keeping the upper body facing downhill, for one, which is tied to my right pole plant. Instead of flicking the pole forward and touching it lightly, I'm literally trying to plant it, and leaving it there to take root. I'm holding on, and that means the pole isn't going forward with me, so neither are my right hand, shoulder, or finally, upper body. I can get away with that here in the easy pitch, but try it on runs like Grandstand: Ski the bottom section as slowly as possible, concentrating on that right-hand pole. I do as instructed. And I can concentrate on it because of the manicured, easy terrain. before grooming became ubiquitous, most ski runs-left to the ravages of skiers and Mother Nature -- bumped up by themselves. I learned bump skiing on Killington's Needle's Eye, a wide, moderately sloped highway that once boasted acres of naturally created, moderate-sized moguls. The advent of pervasive corduroy, however, meant that moguls would remain untouched only in gnarly places. A whole skiing generation now equates bumps with two traits: huge and steep. But, now, with places like Attitash building bumps on runs like Counselor's, grooming has performed a 180, and the opportunity to learn bump skiing without terror has reappeared. Building those bumps, however, requires a true groom-meister. At Attitash Bear Peak, head groomer Bruno Vallieries is that person. Bruno, a bear of a 30-year-old, is an intense guy whose to his calling. "First, you need the right density snow," he says, sounding like Picasso describing how exactingly he mixes his paints. "You want machinegroomed, frozen granular to use as a base because it's heavy and will stay compacted. But, you want natural snow on top for the best finish." He describes how he builds a massive snow mound down the trail's middle, then plows the snow so it slopes out to the trail's edges. Driving uphill now, by dipping and raising the machine's front plow blade, Bruno raises about 100 eight-foot-high snow piles. Then he prays for the storm. And if it doesn't snow? "I just flatten the whole damned thing out and wait for the next storm," he grumbles. If it does snow, Bruno returns with a special "tn-flex" tiller ("It's got three separate sections and it's flexible.") and packs and sculpts the bumps till they're about three: Bumps creator Bruno Vallieries plows his trade. // we follow Dave to a groomed run, where he puts us through some strange paces before skiing the moguls. We ski crouched as low as possible, as if we're squatting. It's awkward, but Dave's making a point. This exaggerated stance on the groomed will make knee-bending in the bumps feel less cumbersome. It's like a baseball player swinging a weighted bat to make the regular bat feel lighter. Back on Counselor's, it clearly makes a difference. I start deliberately, pushing my tips ahead into the trough and allowing my knees to come up like pistons as I pass over each mound. Again, I stop halfway. But, this time I ain't waitin''. I turn and go for it, piecing together all the elements-quick pole plant, flexible knees, and good absorption. And, whoa! Look at this! I'm zipping through the moguls with class. Hell, with style! When linking turns. How good is our run? We insist on doing it again. Dave decides we're ready to move on and presents one last challenge: natural bumps. It has started to snow as we follow him to an advanced-intermediate run called Trillium. After about 50 yards, it drops off to a serious pitch pocked with large, ungainly humps erratically carved by panicky skiers. Without the security of Counselor's perfect shapes and lines, I can sense Lucky's knees stiffening. "Remember those low-as-you-can-go turns," Dave reminds us. On the first go, I lose my line just where the trail drops. I slash to a halt just before veering into the trees. On the second go, I pick the same line, letting myself relax into greater knee flex when the going gets steep and the bumps larger. It works. But just as things are getting better, visibility sinks to zero, and we're forced to call it a day. Photograph Flattening the field to make of new, Western-style puffy fluff snow. A genuine powder day. I'm to meet Lucky at the Kachina Lift, a snail-paced triple that serves only Trillium and a handful of other runs. Lucky's beaming over the freshly powdered groomers he's been cruising while I've been eating breakfast. But he requires a pit stop, so I go solo. I beeline for Trillium with newfound confidence. The moguls are dressed-for-the-prom beautiful in their new, untracked white coats. I smile. I pick my line from yesterday and take it full speed ahead. The powder lets me float. I dip, I extend, I deftly plant a pole, then another. I'm turning. I'm burning. I caress the top of an elephantine mogul and catapult into the steep part. It's all moving as one. I'm picking my line on the fly. I'm adapting to the changes in front of me. Damn! I'm doing it! All the way in perfect sync. No time to slow down now. I'm up, over-and airborne. Whoa baby! I let out a yell, fly seemingly forever, land with a thud-and stay on my feet. Holy sh-! I did the whole run and finished with air! I've got to tell Lucky about this. I've got to tell Dave. Hell, I've got to do that again. MORE BUMP BUILDERS bromley, Vermont: Look for machinemade bumps on East Meadow, West Meadow, and Lift Line, all intermediates. holiday valley, New York: On any given day, there are competition-level bumps on a chosen expert run, moderate bumps on various easier runs, and more bumps in the skier terrain park. killington, Vermont: They can be found on expert-level Superstar and Outer Limits. okemo, Vermont: Expect to find several machine-made fields; in the past, they've been located on Ledges and Chief, both black diamonds. ski plattekill, New York: Look for them along're most often made on lower Warm Up, a novice run. sugarloaf, Maine: Look on Whiffletree, an intermediate-rated trail in a family-skiing zone; and, for competition -- level bumps, on black-rated Skidder. wachusett mountain, Massachusetts: Find them on the 10th Mountain Trail, right under the Polar Express Lift.
MAX ELEVATION: 10,700 feet MAX VERTICAL DROP: 7,000 feet AVERAGE VERTICAL LOGGED PER WEEK: 100,000 feet PRICES: C$4,750 for four days in the low season; C$9,550 for seven days in the high season GETTING THERE: From Revelstoke, follow Highway 3 to Mica Creek (98 miles) and the heli shuttle. INFO: 877-837-6191; micaheliguides.com Beta: If you book a trip with Mica Heli Guides this season, you could be making first descents: The newest operation in the Revelstoke area has just one full season under its belt. And if you book a trip five years from now? Well, you'll still be able to put your mark on the map. MHG has explored only 15 percent of its territory, which spans almost two thousand square miles of glaciers and peaks in the northernmost Canadian Rockies. This place is big. John Candy big. When you hear the guide tell the pilot, "Let's try the next valley, eh?" remember that the next valley could mean Wood River (over 30 bowls); Harvey Clemenceau area (7,000-foot descents). In a single day, expect to hit steep ice fields that meander through thousand-foot rock walls, carve rolling glaciers, and plunder 40-degree tree runs. This outsize playground was a long time coming. After current owner Dan McDonald's permit request spent a decade languishing in British Columbia's bureaucracy, the 2001 election brought in a new administration that processed his application within 140 days. It was worth the wait: Within a year, Mica Heli was up and humming. Today, MHG's plush, million-dollar alpine lodge sits 2,500 feet above Kinbasket Lake, staring down the rival ranges of the Monashees, Selkirks, and Rockies. Let the gratuitous powder surfing commence. SNOWPACK Located on the western slope of the Rockies, MHG gets as much accumulation as the neighboring heli-skiing rangessometimes 60 feet a year. But because it's higher and colder, the snow is significantly lighter. January and February bring the big dumps. (Last January 29, almost four feet piled up. avalanche conditions. TERRAIN HIGHLIGHTS With territory that would dwarf a dozen Whistlers, MHG's variety is mind-blowing. Request the Kinbasket Valley for steep, 3,000-foot faces; the Dawson Valley for a consistent 35-degree, 5,000-foot highway straight down the Iroquois glacier; or the Harvey Valley for old-growth tree shots. WEATHER Storms tracking out of the Pacific slam into the Selkirks and Monashees, which push them northeast into the Canadian Rockies and Mica's home turf. When there's nothing brewing in the west, Kinbasket Lakea 133-mile-long body of water that never freezes overserves up lake-effect snowfall like clockwork. If the visibility is soupy, the pilot just heads to another microclimate. THE GUIDES MHG's chaperones are all fully certified by one of Canada's two guiding organizations. A fewlike lead guide Craig Elliswork with Mica all season, while the rest freelance in the Revelstoke area. THE LODGE The three-story log homestead is remote but deluxe: think heated floors, filtered glacier drinking water, and a hot tub with a panoramic Rockies view. there are a couple of larger suites. THE CHOW Beware heli belly: Mica doesn't scrimp on the grub. Expect slabs of French toast, prosciutto sandwiches on foccacia, and mixed-berry mousse. The culinary trump card? Salmon in a ketchup/Coke sauce. (No, seriouslyit's good.) BANG FOR BUCK If you're comparison shopping, don't just look at dollar signs. Rates here are stiffer than at CMH and Selkirk-Tangiers, but you get (relatively) quiet A-Star birds and small groupsjust four skiers per guide instead of a dozen. MUST-KNOW Pack light. The heli has to shuttle you, your gear, and the wine and steak. Don't hog the basket. EVELYN SPENCE BEEN THERE? GOING THERE? SOUND OFF AT **27;2269;TOOLONG Illustration COLOR PHOTO: HENRY GEORGI "It's mine! All mine! Mine, I tell you! Mine!" Sarah Oakden taking what's hers. //
See also additional image in Table of Contents of same issue Here's some good news. The latest trend in fitness affirms what Suzanne Somers has preached all along: If you want a ripped six-pack, short, targeted abdominal workouts can be more effective than long hours at the gym. So says Jonathan Roche, award-winning fitness expert and founder of Boulder, Colorado-based Breakthrough Health and Fitness. According to Roche, you can gain significant core strength and balance with as little as three 15-minute ab sessions a week. "The trick is to concentrate on keeping clean, meticulous form for every move," says Roche. The payoff? For skiers like 2005 World Dual Moguls champ Toby Dawson, it's a rock-solid core and catlike balance -- the keys to stronger skiing and injury prevention. CORE WORKOUT GETTING STARTED To get your gut of steel, leave the Ab Roller in the closet and run through Roche's ball workout, which targets your entire abdominal wall, as well as your quads, glutes, and balance muscles. Do it three times a week sets you can muster, the workout should only take between 15 and 25 minutes. GEAR UP: You'll need a Bosu Balance Trainer, an eight-pound, two-handled Gaiam Abs Ball, and a stability ball. See opposite page for where to get them. ABS BALL: RUSSIAN TWIST Three sets; 15 reps Sit with your torso at a 45-degree angle off the floor, knees bent, heels touching the ground. Holding the Abs Ball with arms slightly bent, rotate side to side, twisting your trunk and touching the ball to the floor on each side. MAKE IT HARDER: Do the same move, but with both feet elevated several inches off the ground. LOSE YOUR JELLY ROLL You do most of the right things -- stay active, eat in moderation, work your abs. But what about that little jiggle around the middle? Jonathan Roche has some tips to lose the last five pounds. 1. DO N'T REHYDRATE ON BEER. Having an apres pint (or three) is part Coors calories by filling yourself up with a big glass of water with every beer. 2. DRINK (GASP!) LIGHT BEER. Over the course of the year, it could mean the difference between losing 10 pounds and gaining 10. 3. SKI WITH A HYDRATION PACK. Swilling water or Gatorade will help diminish that 10 o'clock stomach rumble -- and water flushes the toxins out of your system and keeps your metabolism revved up. 4. EAT WHOLE FOODS. Whole foods like brown rice, vegetables, and lean meats help you feel fuller, longer -- unlike a bag of chips, which has no nutritional value. 5. WATCH YOUR PORTIONS. The average American ate 2,150 calories a day in 1970 -- and packs away 2,700 now. Translation? If you order the Frisbee-size burger, eat half -- and give the rest to the dog. Then take the dog for a walk. ABS BALL: JACKKNIFE Three sets; 15 reps Lie on your back, holding the Abs Ball overhead, arms your arms and legs toward each other. To keep your lower back safe, it's important to press it against the floor throughout the move, says Roche: "Think of making a U shape with your body, instead of a V." MAKE IT HARDER: Stop at a 45-degree angle, and hold for three to five seconds. BOSU BALANCE TRAINER: SIDE-TO-SIDE SQUATS Three sets; 30-second intervals, building to 90-second intervals Place the Bosu trainer flat side down on the floor and stand to its right. Shuffle up and over the ball, touching the ground on the left side with your left foot and sinking into a slight squat. Keep your right foot on the ball, and immediately bound up and over the ball back to the right, touching down with the right foot. Repeat. MAKE IT HARDER: Sink down into a full squat (with one foot on the ball and one on the floor) at either side of the lateral move. Make sure your knees don't travel up and open, says Roche. BOSU BALANCE TRAINER: BALANCE SHIFTS One set; 12 to 20 reps (6 to 10 per side) for each hand pattern Stand on the ball, knees soft. Start with your arms out in front of you, parallel to the floor and palms down. Move one arm to the side in the same plane, keeping your eyes focused on the moving hand; then bring it back to center. Repeat with the opposite arm. Next, raise one hand at a time toward the ceiling in a half-windmill; then trace a complete windmill with each hand. "Vision is the key to balance," says Roche. "Fixating on a moving object throws off your equilibrium, forcing you to compensate with increased stability." MAKE IT HARDER: Do it with your eyes closed. STABILITY BALL: TRUNK ROTATIONS Three sets; 15 reps Sit on a stability ball and walk your feet forward, rolling your back onto the ball so that it supports your upper hands pointing to the ceiling. Twist both arms slowly to one side until they're parallel with the floor; then swing the arms up and over to the opposite side. MAKE IT HARDER: Bring one leg several inches off the floor while you do the move. STABILITY BALL: BALL TILT Three sets; four reps, building to 15 reps Start with forearms balanced on the ball, hands together, feet on the floor extended out from the ball. Arms should line up with shoulder joints and feet should be together. The move is subtle: Roll the ball a few inches to the right, then to the left, then forward, and then back, hitting the four points of the compass. If you feel any low-back pain, stop. One four-way tilt equals one rep. MAKE IT HARDER: Move your feet farther from the ball. MEET YOUR TRAINER GET THE GOODS GAIAM ABS BALL $40 (includes DVD); gaiam.co BOSU BALANCE TRAINER $100 (includes DVD); bosu.com FITBALL break **26;3193;TOOLONG Illustration PHOTO: MARK COMPTON TOBY DAWSON, MOGULS SPECIALIST, PRAYING FOR CHISELED ABS. NINETEEN PHOTOS: MARK COMPTON PHOTO: MARK COMPTON windmill //
Section: MUTUAL FUNDS
Introducing the MONEY 20 -- a score of mutuals whose performance over the long haul has separated them from the pack. That makes them superb choices, whatever your financial goals.
Over a long distance, the race goes not to the sprinters, but rather to the most consistent runners. So it is with mutual funds. The funds that make most investors feel comfortable -- not to mention richer -- are those that deliver above-average returns year after year and manage to avoid serious stumbles. Thus we present the MONEY 20 -- our own carefully selected roster of 10 stock and 10 bond funds that, above all else, have delivered superior returns for the risks they take.
Our selections, listed in the table on page 122 and profiled below, are divided into three stock and three bond fund categories designed for investors with different life goals. Whether you are looking for a growth fund to build college savings for your two-year-old or a high-yielding government bond fund to live off in retirement, you should be able to find it simply the best we could identify for patient investors -- those who can hold a fund for the five years or so that investments often need to reveal their underlying quality.
Before you pull out your checkbook, however, remember that the best way to invest in mutual funds is to dollar-cost average -- that is, to salt your account with equal amounts at regular intervals, thereby lowering your average cost per share. The strategy is especially key right now. The economy is weak, Mid-east tensions have ignited oil prices, and the short-term outlook for the stock and bond markets is dubious at best.
How did we choose our elite? First, we screened 592 funds, ranking them within categories according to a measure devised by Stanford University finance professor William Sharpe. Sharpe's formula rewards strong performance and penalizes funds for wide swings in price.
Next we threw out any fund that had changed its portfolio manager or investment approach in the past five years. That eliminated such stalwarts as Fidelity Magellan top. We also ditched any funds that may have enjoyed a one-time boost be cause of a narrow investment focus (like sector funds). And because of the instability of the junk bond market, we dropped high-yield funds from our competition, though we retained funds that merely dabble in the risky paper.
Last, we eliminated funds with annual expenses significantly greater than their Category averages. In cases where load and no-load funds were judged roughly comparable, we chose the less expensive no-loads.
The MONEY 20 updates the roster of Recommended Funds that we've followed monthly in Fund Watch since April 1989. We will track the MONEY 20 in the same fashion, monitoring them for flagging performance and management switcheroos. If a fund stops measuring up, we'll replace it.
Here, then, are profiles of the MONEY 20. The stock fund categories appear first. Within the six groupings, funds are listed in order of their five-year returns. GROWTH
AIM Weingarten. AIM manager Harry Hutzler trying to sniff out the market's direction. After managing the $650 million growth fund for 21 years, he says, "I'm all too familiar with the pitfalls of trying to predict markets." Instead, Hutzler and co-manager Jonathan Schoolar, 29, keep the 5.5%-load fund fully invested in the sector they know best: growth stocks.
In fact, Weingarten is the MONEY 20's purest example of growth investing. The fund's 80 stocks have a five-year average earnings growth rate of 21% -- compared with 8.2% for the stocks in the S &P; 500. Up 9.8% in the seven months to Aug. 1, the fund has the highest five-year total return of our 20 funds. But there's a price: volatility, again the highest of our selections.
Hutzler and Schoolar split their portfolio between mainstream growth stocks such as Pepsico (recently traded on the New York Stock Exchange at $75.25) and dark horses that they believe are poised to surprise Wall Street with higher than expected earnings. oil squeeze: Schlumberger (NYSE, $66) and Halliburton (NYSE, $56.50), both oil-service firms.
Janus Venture. You might expect this $245 million Denver no-load to be our riskiest entry, since it specializes in small-company stocks, a notoriously flighty corner of the market. But under manager James Craig, 34, who has run the fund since 1985, Venture has been only 80% as volatile as the S &P; 500, even while beating the market by an average of 4.5 percentage points over each of the past three years. Craig's secret, in large part, is his willingness to shed stocks when he considers the market shaky. In early August, the fund was a cautious 25% in cash, and in light of the Mideast crisis, Craig is in no hurry to put that money to work: "Rising oil prices could keep interest rates high, which is not good for my kind of stocks."
As a stock picker, Craig favors neglected small companies that his recent buys: retailer Leslie Yaye (recently traded over the counter at $12.75 a share), which he sees rising to $20 after upgrading its line of women's apparel, and Healthcare Services Group (OTC, $22.75), a nursing-home services firm that he thinks could hit $30 a share within a year.
SteinRoe Special. SteinRoe co-managers Richard Weiss, 39, and Carlene Murphy, 34 -- fund stewards since 1981 and' 86, respectively -- try to find companies in which earnings are about to pop because of a new product or trend. But they also aim to buy at low cost, often at 40% to 50% discounts to the price the concern would fetch in an acquisition. Recent buys: CRSS (NYSE, $14), a Houston engineering and construction firm, and Mesa Limited Partnership (NYSE, $4.75), an oil-and-gas producer that Weiss and Murphy expect to benefit from ballooning oil prices.
The strategy has earned the $400 million no-load a 128% return over the past fund. The fund's volatility: slightly below the average.
SoGen International. Despite its name and French sponsor (the megabank Societe Generale), this uniquely flexible 3.75%-load fund defies categorization as a conventional international fund -- or, for that matter, as a conventional anything. Recently, Jean-Marie Eveillard, 50, SoGen's helmsman since 1979, had 26% of the $203 million portfolio in U.S. stocks, 14% in foreign equities, 28% in U.S. and foreign bonds, 8% in gold and a liberal 24% in cash. Such broad diversification has helped make SoGen not only the least volatile of our four growth choices, but also less risky than 194 of the 196 growth funds we follow. At the same time, the five-year average annual gain has been superb: 17% compared with 13.8% for the typical growth fund.
Already pessimistic about the fragile U.S. economy, Eveillard has turned even more bearish in the wake of the crisis in the Persian Gulf. The shock of rapidly rising oil prices, he. "America built up huge debt levels in the 1980s," he says. "It was an accident waiting to happen." Consequently, Eveillard intends to keep a high cash position; recent purchases have focused on out-of-favor securities such as junk bonds (4% of the portfolio) and healthy savings banks (2%) that he thinks have been wrongly tarred with their markets' well-publicized troubles. TOTAL RETURN
United Income. All that you can count on in the stock market, says United manager Russell Thompson, 50, is that things won't stand still. In his view, the way to make money is to anticipate changes before anyone else. Specifically, Thompson, the $1.7 billion fund's manager since 1979, looks for solid, dividend-paying blue chips that will benefit from cyclical economic trends. "Most of the stocks we own are household names," he says. Example: ITT (NYSE, $54.75), which at 2.5% of assets is the fund's largest holding.
for one of the 5% of funds that still charge a platinum-plated 8.5% load. The equity-income entry posted a 140% five-year return to Aug. 1, placing it in the top 5% of all stock funds. Volatility: 5% lower than that of the average stock fund.
Financial Industrial Income. In contrast to United, which gets most of its income from stock dividends, $550 million Industrial Income relies heavily on bonds as well to generate yield. Manager John Kaweske, 48, the no-load's pilot since 1985, currently has 20% of the equity-income fund in conventional corporates and convertibles, including 6% in high-yield issues. That has helped boost the fund's yield to 4%, compared with 3.5% for the S &P.;
Letting bonds support the fund's income gives Kaweske a free hand to invest the rest of the portfolio for growth. Currently Kaweske likes pharmaceuticals like Eli Lilly (NYSE, $78.25) and Bristol-Myers Squibb (NYSE, $61.50), which he figures have the cash flow and pricing flexibility needed to of America. Last year, five of this 5.75%-load fund's 10 largest holdings rose in value by 50% or more. That's the kind of record you might expect from a superhot emerging growth fund -- not from a $6 billion institution that invests mostly in household-name blue chips like Philip Morris (NYSE, $45.25), the fund's largest holding, which rose 64% last year.
Investment decisions are made by lead manager William Newton, 59, and five co-managers, each of whom is responsible for investing a separate portion of the fund's assets. "None of us are hot or cold all at once toward the market," says Newton. "That tends to reduce volatility." The team approach, plus an above-average yield of 3.7%, have helped keep ICA's risk level slightly lower than that of the average growth and income fund. Meanwhile, five-year average annual gains, at 17%, rank in the category's top 5%.
Phoenix Balanced. The only balanced fund on of its assets in bonds, primarily three-year Treasuries. Patricia Bannan, 28, who has managed the fund since 1985, varies the allocation based on her economic outlook, though the fixed-income slice can never go below 25%. Still, the 6.9%-load fund gained 390% over the past 10 years, tops among balanced funds.
On the stock side, Bannan is a classic growth investor who focuses on short-term earnings momentum and long-term growth rates. Disciplined and decisive, she will dump a stock instantly if it fails to live up to her expectations. "That keeps you from falling in love with the stock," she says. In an economy hampered by rising oil prices and sluggish growth, she expects that consistent earners like Merck (NYSE, $83) and Waste Management (NYSE, $37.50) will continue to post strong gains. OVERSEAS
T. Rowe Price International Stock. The London-based management team for this $1.3 billion fund has proved that old-fashioned growth-stock investing works as well abroad as it does at home 46, who's been the no-load's top gun since 1985, International seeks out large and medium-size companies with prospects for steady, dependable growth. "We'd rather have consistent returns than spectacular gains in some years and lousy ones in others," says Wade. So far, so good: despite the extra currency risk of investing abroad, the fund has been about 10% less volatile than the average domestic growth fund. At the same time, its 255% return over the past five years places it in the top 25% in its category.
The portfolio covers 24 countries, with the largest portions going to Japan (24%), Germany (15%) and the U.K. (15%). Despite this year's 14% run-up in German stock prices, Wade is still bullish on German engineering and construction companies that he thinks will benefit from that country's reunification. Two such firms: Siemens ($86.25) and Mannesmann ($185), both of which trade over the counter as American Depositary Receipts Gula, 41, and John Wagstaff-Callahan, 66, rely heavily on computers to analyze 2,500 stocks in 19 markets for their $850 million no-load. For the past several years, the team has screened mainly for high-yielding, relatively unknown small companies that are selling at low prices relative to earnings and asset values. Their largest holdings are in Japan (20%), the U.K. (15%) and Germany (13%). The combination of a bargain-hunting investment style and computer-imposed discipline has paid off the fund's 238% five-year return ranks it in the top 30% of all international funds, while volatility is in the bottom 10%.
More recently, however, Gula and Wagstaff-Callahan have begun to adapt their portfolio to the world's new economic realities. Specifically, they are looking both for small European companies that are likely to be acquired and for multinational giants such as Siemens and Nestle (ADR OTC, $57.50). Says Gula: "We think that these companies are going to be among the global leaders of Income. In a fund category dominated by billion-dollar behemoths designed to crank out yield, FPA New Income (4.5% load) is a $35 million pipsqueak that aims to produce a high total return. Robert Rodriguez, 41, the manager since 1984, generally invests about 75% of assets in staid U.S.-backed mortgage securities and five- to 10-year-term Treasuries. But with the rest of the fund he goes bargain hunting. As much as 7% of it was recently in high-yield corporates that Rodriguez bought at distress prices when government regulators forced savings and loans to dump junk. "With prices so depressed, yields on these bonds are finally compensating investors for their risk," he says.
FPA's yield, lately 7.9%, is a full percentage point below that of the typical mortgage fund, but the total return is top rank. The fund rose 66% in the past five years, compared with the average gain in its category of 55%. FPA's risk: 27% below the average.
AMEV U.S. Government Securities largely because Dennis Ott, 44, the fund's manager since 1985, made correct interest-rate calls over the past five years. That's not to say, though, that the 4.5%-load fund yo-yos heavily in and out of the market. Says Ott: "We try to anticipate changes in interest rates and the economy, but we don't bet the farm." The fund's 64% five-year gain to Aug. 1 placed it in the top 20% of government bond funds; its volatility, meanwhile, ranked in the bottom 30% of the category.
Despite the turmoil in the bond market since the invasion of Kuwait, Ott is betting that rates will change little over the next six months. The manager's next move: some selective trading to shorten the fund's average weighted maturity from eight to seven years.
Vanguard Fixed Income -- GNMA. In the relatively homogeneous GNMA group, this $2.4 billion no-load's minuscule 0.31% expense ratio (vs. 0.99% at the typical mortgage portfolio) gives the fund, 47, the head man since 1980, gets a 0.68 percentage point head start. (The thrifty cost structure is typical of other Vanguard funds and helps explain why Sullivan, who also runs Vanguard Investment Grade, is the only manager to direct two funds in the MONEY 20.) With that kind of edge, the fund has been able to provide a 63% total return over the past five years -- compared with 55% for the average mortgage-backed fund -- while holding risk at roughly the category average.
Sullivan anticipates a small rise in interest rates as the bond market adjusts to the oil shock, but over the next 12 to 24 months, he expects the sluggish economy to drive rates back below recent levels by three-quarters of a point or so. Accordingly, he has shifted the portfolio into GNMAs with lower payouts, which tend to be more sensitive to interest-rate declines.
Lexington GNMA. Like Dennis Ott of AMEV, Lexington GNMA manager Denis Jamison, 43, makes his portfolio maneuvers at of the fund's holdings more than once every two years or so," he says. "The more changes you make, the more prone you are to errors." But Jamison does trade about 25% of the no-load's $97 million portfolio fairly often, to keep a hand in the market and perhaps add a bit to his fund's return. Over the past five years, Lexington is up 59% compared with 55% for the average GNMA fund.
Currently most of the portfolio is invested in GNMAs with relatively low payout rates of 8.5% to 9.5%, securities that stand to appreciate more than other GNMAs if rates fall. "We probably won't change our stance until we see the yields on 30-year Treasuries drop from about 8.8% now to 7.2%," says Jamison. At that point, he might shorten maturities and raise the cash level, currently 5%, to as much as 15%. CORPORATE BONDS
IDS Selective. High-grade IDS Selective (5% load) goes where the bond market values 43, currently has 17% of the $1.2 billion fund in government bonds. His view is that the call protection and impeccable credit quality of Treasuries is worth sacrificing about a percentage point in yield compared with high-grade corporates. In addition, if the bond market turns bearish, Goodner can sell his governments fast and raise cash. In short, Selective can be just that: choosy. The fund scored a five-year gain of 66%, better than 95% of funds in its high-grade corporate category, while taking an average level of risk. "The biggest factor in performance is the movement of interest rates. If we think rates are going up, we head for the sidelines," says Goodner, whose current cash position is a moderately cautious 12%.
Bond Fund of America. Abner Goldstine, 59, the MIT-educated economist who heads Bond Fund's seven-member management team, attributes the $1.6 billion fund's success to a thoroughly researched, highly flexible investment approach. Goldstine's crew has scored with fixed-income instruments ranging home-grown credit research to discover gems overlooked by the rating agencies. The result has been consistent performance that rarely topped the charts but nevertheless clocked an average 10.7% total return over each of the past five years, about 2.4 points a year more than the average corporate bond fund.
The 4.75%-load fund's largest holdings, making up 25% of the portfolio, are U.S. Treasuries and agency issues. But Goldstine and his credit researchers have also been prowling around the ruins of the savings and loan industry for bargain-priced bonds issued by healthy thrifts such as Oakland-based Golden West Financial and Los Angeles-based Great Western Financial.
Vanguard Fixed Income-Investment Grade. This $1.1 billion no-load has one of the lowest expense ratios in its class: 0.34% of assets per year. As in Paul Sullivan's GNMA fund -- he has managed this one since 1976 -- such efficiency helps returns. Result: five-year performance that ranks in the top 20% of high-grade corporate funds.
But this fund is not for the faint of heart. The fund it ranges between 15 and 25). That should make Investment Grade easily the most volatile of our corporate bond funds.
Babson Bond Trust -- Portfolio L. In stark contrast to Vanguard's Sullivan, Babson portfolio manager Edward Martin, 40, doesn't like to gamble with interest rates. "We think trying to guess rates is a futile exercise," he says. Instead, Martin, who's been at the no-load's helm since 1984, keeps his $87 million fund's average maturity at nine years or so and relies on his own research and economic outlook to locate values in the bond market. Five-year average annual return through July was 10%, better than two-thirds of corporate funds. Its volatility: 17% less than the average corporate fund.
Lately, Martin has been leaning toward credit-risk-free Treasuries and government agencies, which constitute almost half the fund's assets. Among the few corporate bonds he's currently buying are BBB-rated issues of utility companies, such as Commonwealth Edison and Columbia Gas. firms to so-called event risk -- the sudden financial restructurings that can cause downgrades in credit ratings. MUNICIPAL BONDS
Financial Tax-Free Income. Financial's William Veronda, 44, the $185 million no-load's manager since 1984, has made money betting on interest rates. By lengthening the maturities in his high-grade portfolio to 24 years and loading up on highly rate-sensitive discount bonds (those selling for less than their face value), Veronda capitalized on falling interest rates over the past five years to rack up a market-beating total return of 70%. The drawback: a volatility among the highest in its class.
Anticipating higher rates in the wake of the oil crisis, Veronda has now begun to hedge his bets. He has offset interest-rate risk by hiking his holdings in relatively stable premium munis (those trading for more than face value) from 25% last year to 40% recently. Meanwhile, Veronda is focusing on what he considers undervalued issues in regions with diversified, recession-resistant economies. Two examples, both utilities: Intermountain.
Safeco Municipal. With a 68% return over the past five years, this $302 million Seattle no-load outgained more than 90% of muni funds while subjecting shareholders to a risk level only slightly above the category average. Steve Bauer, 45, the fund's manager since 1981, attributes his success to a bargain-hunting investment approach that has led him in the past to put as much as 10% of the fund in BBB-rated grade bonds. Since late last year, however, Bauer says that the yield advantage of medium-grade bonds has been too narrow to compensate for the extra credit risk, and he has kept 88% of his portfolio in issues rated A or better.
Ever the bargain hunter, though, Bauer is upbeat about the market uncertainty in the wake of the Kuwait invasion. "What always happens in these situations," he says, "is that people get: scared and sell bonds cheap." Reporter associates: Deborah Lohse and Prashanta Misra

PHOTOS (COLOR): OUR TOP FOR YOUR LIFE GOALS STOCK FUNDS TO BUY AND HOLD
The equity funds in the MONEY 20 provided exceptional long-term gains, particularly when measured' against their level of risk. On that basis, each of our talented 10 outpaced at least 80% of the funds in its category, thus receiving a MONEY risk-adjusted grade of A. Despite uniformly excellent performance, though, the funds are not all alike. Those with high P/Es pay premium prices for fast-growing stocks; those with high yields cushion risk with income. A cash level over 10%, meanwhile, suggests that the fund's manager is currently cautious about the market. TABLE BOND FUNDS THAT WILL STAND TALL
Like the stock funds above, the fixed-income funds in the MONEY 20 met strict standards of excellence. Eight of our 10 bond entries earned A-level honors by placing in the top 20% of their categories on a risk-adjusted basis. (The two B's -- which outscored 60% of their competition -- rose to the top in categories in which many A-rated funds a fund's volatility, check its maturity and cash level; low cash and long maturities indicate that a fund is likely to be quite sensitive to interest-rate changes. TABLE
Section: MONEY UPDATE News about your money
When the $13 billion insurance subsidiaries of Los Angeles-based First Executive Corp. were taken over by state regulators in New York and California in April, most Americans didn't much care. But as they see how the junk-bond-driven debacle could eventually cost them -- even if they never heard of First Executive until now -- they'll start caring a lot. The public, you included, could end up paying higher state taxes, forking over more in life insurance premiums or getting lower rates of return on policies and annuities.
Of course, that's a relatively sweet deal compared with what the owners of First Executive's 348,000 insurance policies, annuities and guaranteed investment contracts (GICs) may get. Thanks to the aggressive investment practices of First Executive under its chairman Fred Carr, who was one of Michael Milken's biggest junk bond customers, clients of the two troubled units -- Executive Life Insurance Co. in Los Angeles and the Executive Life Insurance Co. of New York City -- could wind up getting stiffed. For interest rates on First Executive annuities to between 3% and 7%. All told, unless other companies come along and take over the units, the mess will almost certainly lead to the insurance industry's biggest failure ever, dwarfing the 1983 fall of $4 billion Baldwin-United.
If a bailout is required, as now seems likely, the ripple effects could spread dramatically. That's because, unlike the banking and thrift industries, which have federally guaranteed deposit insurance, life insurers in 47 states rely on a patchwork of industry-sponsored state "guarantee" funds. (Only Colorado, Louisiana, New Jersey and Washington, D.C. have no such funds.) A guarantee fund represents a promise that the insurers licensed to do business in the state will chip in a portion of their premiums to help bail out policyholders of a rival insurer that goes bust.
If healthy insurers have to pony up cash for First Executive customers, they'll almost certainly turn to their policyholders for the money. Result: rising premiums, too early to say how large the price hikes or payout cuts might be.
The potential for tax hikes, although also speculative, is no less ominous. In 36 of the states with guarantee funds, insurance companies get substantial tax breaks for pitching in on a bailout. Since these states could need to make up $3 billion in lost tax revenue, according to Marty Leary, research director of the Southern Finance Project, a Charlotte, N.C. study group, their households might be hit with tax hikes amounting to $100 or more.
There is, however, at least some good that could eventually come out of all this. First Executive's fall could be the catalyst for congressional action, such as the creation of federal standards for insurers' junk bond holdings. Traditionally, Congress has let the states plus the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) keep tabs on insurers. But given that an NAIC internal memo in December 1990 stated that California's Executive Life was in "no imminent step in, says consumer advocate Robert Hunter, president of the not-for-profit National Insurance Consumer Organization. "It's clear that the state regulators haven't done enough," he says. OUR CONSUMER COMFORT POLL TABLE
Americans' postwar optimism about the U.S. economy has faded a bit, according to the latest MONEY/ABC consumer poll. But stable home prices led more than half of those surveyed in April to say that now is a good or excellent time to by a house. -- Jordan E. Goodman
Is this a good time to buy a house? TABLE
PHOTO (COLOR): PoorFirst Executive chairman Fred Carr's junk bond strategy has blown up.
By Beth Kobliner
At one time or another, all of us have thought of starting over in some wild, green corner of the world. The Kawatski family has done it -- and they have a remarkable story of self-sufficiency.
Tucked away among the mountains in a northern corner of British Columbia, a hand-hewn log home sits like a speck of propriety in the wilderness. Despite the logs, ifs quite an elegant home with its dormer peaks and big windows looking down from a clearing on a hillside to the neat vegetable garden below. But just beyond the tidy house and clearing, the wild roses, columbine, and yarrow scramble over the hillside in summer. And in the neat garden itself, a creek frolics like a truant through the straight rows of hard-working cabbages and potatoes and onions and carrots.
Across a field, a blond, bearded man -- my husband, Jay -- drives a gaggle of crabby geese toward a fresh patch of horsetails. I am nearby, harvesting rhubarb with my eleven-year-old daughter while my young son looks on. This is no, and has been for the past seven years. My family and I live in the wilderness, 120 miles from the nearest town.
I wasn't born to this life; I adopted it. I grew up in Kamloops, British Columbia, went to the university there, and then spent eight years seeing the world, mostly large cities like London, Berlin, and Paris. I tried hard to adapt to big-city life. In London, I was a nanny for twin boys. In Berlin, I had a job building harpsichords. I drank tea with the proud Afghanis before the Soviet invasion, and visited India, where I saw the human spirit soar above famine and poverty.
Short, intense bouts of tree-planting in British Columbia financed most of my wanderings abroad. It was a schizophrenic existence. One month I would be dressed in lace, sipping cafe au lait at a fancy sidewalk cafe in Paris. The next month, I was standing on some obscure Canadian mountainside, with hand, planting trees for tomorrow.
But my serious move to wilderness life began in 1978, when the B.C. Forest Service hired me to be the first female lookout attendant at the Bob Quinn fire tower, 120 miles north of Stewart -- a tiny town near the Alaskan border. The prospect of spending three months alone on a mountaintop terrified me, but I needed the money. I also had enough solitary pursuits -- writing, yoga, and reading -- to keep me busy. I intended to explore my surroundings as much as possible. Wanting a little company, I acquired a husky pup in Stewart.
While in Stewart, I heard stories about the wild hermit who lived in the Bob Quinn Lake area near the fire tower. His bare feet would inevitably beat a path to my door, people said. His reputation as an unpredictable barbarian left such an impression in my mind that when I bought a buck knife it wasn't with the bears in mind.
The Bob Quinn lookout above the tangle of alpine fir at the treeline. In every direction, as far as the eye could see, was wilderness. Mountains stood on three sides and I could see the Iskut River flowing for 100 miles down a valley. There were white ice fields to the west, and the Iskut burn, a grey 100,000-acre beast, sprawled to the north. Far below, the unpaved Stewart-Cassiar highway raised dust plumes when trucks passed.
The shack I was to call home for the summer had a single room with 23 windows. The fire finder, a heavy platform with a map and a revolving scope, sat in the center of the room. All the furniture -- cot, cupboards, table, oil stove, and fridge -- was at crouch level so nothing would obstruct the view. Heavy cables secured the shack, none too securely, to the mountain.
During the day I often stared south at Bob Quinn Lake, with its island in the center, and from there to rumor had it, the hermit lived in an octagonal log cabin he had built himself. Each clear night, I watched the sun set into mountains. After dark, I'd go outside to see Venus, the dippers, and Orion, hanging like delicate buttercups in a field of sky. I found that I enjoyed my solitude and felt freer than 1 ever had before.
One foggy afternoon, as I sat at my table writing, I saw two human figures emerge from the mist. I opened the door and invited inside what turned out to be two young boys on a hike from the nearby highway camp. A few moments later, more company arrived -- two older boys, a black lab, and a nanny goat. Last but not least came the legendary hermit, who introduced himself as Jay. I felt no fear as he smiled at me. After all the wild stories, I was almost disappointed by how civilized he was.
His blond hair and beard were neatly mink and otter cape on his shoulders and a marten cap on his head. He even wore boots.
Jay told me he was from Wisconsin originally and had been in British Columbia for 11 years. He was 31. In pursuit of a lifelong dream to live in the wilderness and master his own fate, he had followed the uncompleted Stewart-Cassiar highway as far as he could. He had put in a hard first winter alone in a dingy cabin on the shore of Bob Quinn Lake while he searched the valleys and forests for a suitable building site. Spring found him on the shore of Desire Lake.
Year by year, Jay had learned more about hunting, about gathering and preserving food, and about living in equilibrium with the beautiful, but uncaring, land. He taught himself wood carving and became adept at sewing skins and weaving moose hide into snowshoes.
Five days after Jay's first visit, he was back with some homemade huckleberry jelly, rhubarb wine, and a tiny. When I saw the red canoe crossing Bob Quinn Lake, far below, I knew that I could expect Jay within a few hours. For the chance to see me, he would make a round trip of 19 miles -- 15 miles hiking, 4 miles paddling. The final trail up the mountain to the lookout was very rugged, a near-vertical rise of 2,500 feet.
At the end of the summer, I visited Jay's octagonal cabin on Desire Lake. Sun streamed through a bay window where tea roses grew. Wolf skins hung on homemade furniture. Books, carvings, and wooden toys lined the shelves. I enjoyed, in particular, the wooden owl whose wings rose up when a towel was hung on the hook at its base.
The following summer, I returned to the fire tower once again. To make a long and romantic story short, we were married that fall.
In November, I began my initiation into bush life. In some ways the transition I usually chose walking over riding buses, and was used to covering miles on foot. But now, hiking was a way of life; we are three miles by a boggy foot trail from the highway, and we also go on long rambles near home.
I think that the hardest part of the transition, apart from loneliness and not being able to flit off on a whim, was adjusting to the short winter days. In the past, it had been so easy to flick a switch, but here we had no electricity. And when the days finally stretched and warmed, and I could peel off my winter clothes, I was attacked by every size and shape of insect imaginable. When it comes to wilderness living, if anything can knock someone from an idealist to a realist in 10 minutes flat, it is the bugs.
In June 1980 our daughter Natalia was born in the cabin beside Desire Lake. The next spring we moved to the rich, alluvial land in sense of peace at our home on Desire Lake, but we could never grow a decent garden in the acidic, weed-choked soil there.
Our new home sits in a clearing that we carved from the thick jungle on this beautiful 300-acre river flat. The Ningunsaw River, a tributary of the Iskut, flows east to west through the center of our valley, and the giant spruce, balsam, and cottonwoods there can make us feel as small as gnomes at times. In season, even the stinging nettles, cow parsnips, and ferns tower over our heads. On one side of the valley, a peak we simply call South Mountain rises to an altitude of 6,000 feet, and Rocky Mountain goats live on its high ridges.
At first, we slept in the 12 X 16-foot kitchen. During the day, we moved an entire hill with sweat and shovels so that we could build our 21 X 34-foot addition. We now have two stories plus an attic.
We are the areas farther north or south, where the salmon are. We began by squatting on the land, but now have a license of occupation from the government. That means we pay taxes but have official permission to stay here.
Our family of four lives on between $2,000 and $3,000 a year. Jay makes $2,000 to $2,500 a year form his wood carvings and does a little tanning for local trappers. We earn $660 a year keeping weather records for Environment Canada and also trade some of the vegetables from our three-acre garden.
Out here, I've learned the pleasures and frustrations of dog sledding and snowshoeing. I've learned the bitter realities of using the outhouse at -30 Degrees C -- or worse, during the bug season. I've learned patience during the endless fall rains.
Bit by bit, we are engineering a few small luxuries. Until recently, the closest thing we had to running water was me descending to the creek with buckets. Now a gasoline pump eliminates the tedious up a steep 40-foot slope. We have a cold-water tap right in the kitchen and eventually will have a hot-water system as well. Also in our plans is a water wheel, to give us electricity for more precious light in winter.
We subsist on wild meat, with domestic chickens, rabbits, and geese to supplement it. We never shoot more than one moose a year, and we use every part. We boil down the bones for soup stock, and make the skin into rawhide.
Our lives are tightly governed by the seasons. During the warm months, we're busy growing and storing away food for the winter. Our garden provides us and our animals with all the vegetables we need. Last year, we harvested 1,755 pounds of potatoes and 1,050 pounds of carrots. We also grew parsnips, peas, cabbage, lettuce, broccoli, cauliflower, spinach, brussels sprouts, onions, garlic, strawberries, rhubarb, raspberries, asparagus, celery, and parsley. Our season.
The endless round of pioneer chores often prevents us from going on casual hikes. Even as I write this, I am hustling off every few sentences to split and carry in wood, to feed the fire, to carry laundry to the creek, and to put water on the stove.
I also have a great deal to wash, all by hand, in spring. I move my laundry down to the creek to enjoy the sunshine and mountains as I scrub. I use wool gloves inside rubber gloves to protect myself from the icy bite of the creek water.
In the snowy months, I have more time for projects like writing, knitting, sewing, and stitching slippers from some of the hides that Jay has tanned. Jay spends may hours carving. Our daughter learns her three R's through a correspondence course, and in her spare time, she shares our artistic enthusiasm for carving and making things. We all find ample time for other kinds of learning too greatest teacher on earth.
Winter also allows us more time to explore our wilderness. During the day, the frozen river becomes our highway and we travel on foot, on skis, or by sled. Jay uses a snowmobile to haul firewood and supplies. During the long winter nights, Jay and I often take turns reading books aloud.
Our lifestyle is not for everyone. Each person has to choose his or her priorities. For me, a relatively pure environment is more important that a world of gadgets. We delight in the wilderness around us, and in the comings and goings of animals, weather, and seasons. But people who don't understand still shake their heads and say that we live "in the middle of nowhere."
We also value the self-sufficiency that comes with our pioneer life. Sometimes, as I look out at the clothesline and see diapers, blinding white in the sunlight and washed on the scrub board in the tradition of my grandmother, I of accomplishment. And when I watch our cupboards fill up with jars of berries, pickles, meat, and trout, and know that they will see us through to the next harvest, there is a satisfying feeling of security.
Granted, it is difficult to live without friends and neighbors. So we sometimes dream of a friendly community springing up around us -- people who share similar ideals. Unfortunately, most people who come north are a transient breed. They seem to he holdovers from the gold rush era, and they want to head north, strike it rich, rape the land, and flee south again to the rewards of civilization. Meanwhile, we'll continue to live in harmony with the wild, respecting the thousand and one creatures, understanding our own insignificance in the great scheme of things and loving this land that we have chosen to call home.
PHOTOS (COLOR): Above: Jay and Deanna Kawatski. Right: The Kawatski homestead near Bob Quinn Lake, British above) cooks for the family on a cast-iron stove while Jay (top) prepares a rabbit hide for tanning. Son Ben never lacks distractions in the workshop.
PHOTOS (COLOR): The Kawatski's root cellar (above) overflows with carrots, potatoes, and turnips. Jay carries grain bundles (top) tied to the handle of his shovel.
PHOTO (COLOR): Jay used every part of a moose. Here, a moose-leg couch.
By Deanna Kawatski

Jay and Deanna Kawatski gave up the city lights for a handmade log cabin in northern B.C., 120 miles from the nearest town. Their family of four lives on less than $3,000 a year.
A SPECIAL WILDERNESS DELIVERY
The decision to have my baby in our wilderness home on Desire Lake was not an easy one. I was 29 and this was my first baby. If anything went wrong, it was a 1-1/2-hour hike through the woods and a 120-mile drive over a potholed road to the always been healthy and I have a husband, Jay, whose years of solitary living have taught him not to panic in times of danger.
During my pregnancy, I visited my doctor five times. They assured me everything was fine. So Jay and I carefully prepared ourselves for the birth. I practiced breathing techniques and relaxation, kept up my exercise, and ate a good diet. Even toward the end, a hike of eight miles was nothing unusual.
As I should have realized, though, there is no way to plan life around nature. Like many first-time mothers, my due date, June 15, came and went. To make matters worse, there hadn't been any rain for weeks and I was getting worried about our garden. It was in the valley two miles away where we were building our new cabin. At this stage, I didn't want to be alone while Jay went off to tend the vegetables, so on June 18, we both hiked and evening, thinning and watering the lettuce and beets. In the evening, as we sat eating supper beside the open fire, I noticed that my tailbone was sore and it was impossible to find a comfortable sitting position. Having only stumps and ground to sit on, of course, didn't help things much.
We slept on boards in the half-finished cabin that night, then on June 19 worked in the garden again. The sun beat down on us, and it was a great effort for me to move from row to row. When we sat down by the river to rest, I suddenly realized we had no time to lose. We had to get back to our cabin immediately.
It took strength to climb that first great hill out of the valley, a steep rise of 200 feet. It was like climbing 20 flights of stairs while in labor. Then, after another 100-foot hill, I felt a sudden burst of warm liquid down my legs. I knew p.m., and the contractions began with two miles of rough trail to go.
When the waves of painful contractions forced me to stop, swarms of mosquitoes crawled into my eyes, ears, and nose and bit me without mercy. But I also vividly remember the masses of butterflies that kept exploding from the trail ahead of us.
Two hours later, filthy and exhaustd, we reached the cabin. I lay down while Jay flew into a blizzard of activity. He chopped wood, started the fire, fed the animals, fetched and heated water, made dinner, cut up the three gallons of rhubarb he had packed back form the valley, and massaged the small of my back when the pain became too severe.
I squatted and tried to keep control by panting, but suddenly I was possessed by such a strong urge that I found myself growling like an animal and pushing. Before I knew it, the baby's head was through. I pushed some more and the rest.
I screamed as Jay appeared to fumble and drop her. He was actually whipping her around to get the cord off her neck. She was a moonstone color and her head was so pointed I couldn't help but wonder what planet she was from.
Jay quickly sucked the mucus out of her nose and mouth and she began to kick and cry. He laid her across my stomach and I massaged the vermix into her skin. To my amazement, she hoisted herself up on elbows and knees, threw her head back and looked into my face. It was 5:20 a.m. and all was well. The strength of her cry assured us that Natalia had made a safe crossing from the spirit world.
PHOTO (COLOR): Natalia Kawatski, in the Kawatski homestead
By Deanna Kawatski
New research may have profound implications for coyotes, the most misunderstood predators in the American West
TICK... TICK, chirps the little box about the size of a transistor radio. TICK. Biologist Bob Crabtree slowly turns the receiver's antenna, which towers out of the roof of a plywood shack on Yellowstone National Park's Blacktail Plateau. TICK, TICK. The signals are coming faster now. Crabtree glances out the plastic window in the general direction the antenna is pointing -- toward his target. "He's out over there," Crabtree says, aiming his finger toward a lonely grove of pines in the distance. "They're out there resting up while it's still hot out. Later on, when it cools off, they'll become active and start hunting for food."
Resting in the far-off stand on a summer afternoon in Yellowstone is perhaps the most misunderstood but prevalent predator of the American West. It's smaller than a wolf but larger than a fox, and more mottled in looks than both. It is both. What Crabtree and his crew have been watching so intently in Yellowstone for the last year, and will for the next four, is canis latrans: the coyote.
In perhaps the first large-scale study of a coyote population untinged by human wrath, the team, funded by the National Park Service, is examining the wily creatures and their intrinsic connection to other parts of the Yellowstone ecosystem. What they are discovering may have profound impacts on government coyote-eradication projects and may also imply dramatic changes in Yellowstone's pending restoration of another major predator, the grey wolf.
 "We really need to know our predators to know how complete our ecosystem is," says Yellowstone Research Chief John Varley. "Since predators top the food chain, everything is magnified for them. They are really a defining factor in environmental health."
Using advanced research techniques, the team is finding coyotes in Yellowstone very different from those inhabiting other western lands, where they are annually subjected to multi-million dollar, tax-funded killing structures and hunt in packs like wolves. This is probably the normal lifestyle for coyotes; not the solitary life coyotes in the West have adopted to survive the advancement of civilization. In the absence of wolves, Crabtree suspects, coyotes have slid at least partially into the wolves' niche, often preying on large mammals like elk that might not normally be such a large part of their diet.
"Coyotes have certainly taken over some of the wolf's role in the park," Crabtree says. "How much and how well is what we are trying to find out." But whatever it is, the coyote, not prey species, is the one creature that probably will be most affected if wolves come back, because the two species will be in direct competition for prey.
A romantic icon of the American West, the coyote-=-sometimes nicknamed the "moon dog" or "prairie wolf" -- has long filled frontier lore. In American Indian fables, the coyote appeared often as yipping bay was a familiar sound of security. But soon, the coyote became the hated scourge of modern ranchers whose sheep they sometimes kill. Today, the Department of Agriculture spends close to $30 million nationwide on predator control projects to kill coyotes, primarily on western rangeland.
That does not include the sanctuary of Yellowstone, but it once did. When the world's first national park was established in 1872, it was a haven for big-game hunters who reasoned that coyotes, wolves, mountain lions, and other predators unfairly cut into their take. So hunters and park managers began lacing carcasses with strychnine and broken glass and dynamiting dens to kill any scavenging "flesh-eaters."
"In the winter coyotes hereabouts became so numerous that I at last felt obligated to order the destruction of some of them," early park Superintendent George S. Anderson wrote in his 1893 annual report. In 1897, Superintendent S.B.M. Young commented that "coyotes are numerous and bold. It is estimated that of a herd and on the slopes of Mount Everts, 75 (15 percent of the herd) were killed by coyotes during the past winter, and many antelope fawns, elk calves, and broods of grouse have been destroyed by them this season." According to historic records from 1904 to 1935, 121 mountain lions, 132 wolves, and .4,352 coyotes were killed in the park.
While wolves and cougars were virtually wiped out of Yellowstone by the turn of the century, coyotes -- more abundant, prolific, and wary -- hung on despite continued intermittent killing. It was not until 1940 that they and other predators (for which it was too late) finally got the same protection as the tourist-pleasing wildlife. That was the year that naturalist Adolph Murie published his landmark study, "Ecology of the Coyote in the Yellowstone," which for the first time credited the coyote as a "desirable member of the assembly of animals."
Biologists usually examined specific animal species, most often big game, hunting "harvest." But Murie was one of the first to consider a species within the context of its entire environment -- looking, for instance, at how the coyote affects other prey animals as well. He concluded that coyotes and other predators play an important role in keeping other species from gophers to elk healthy by culling the weak and infirm.
"The big picture is the key," says renowned predator biologist Maurice Hornocker, who founded the nonprofit Wildlife Research Institute, which is administering the $120,000 coyote study and a simultaneous study of Yellowstone mountain lions, which could be sharply affected by wolves cutting into their hunting base. "What Murie did and what we're doing on an even more advanced basis is looking at all the environmental influences that affect an organism directly and indirectly. It's a seamless fabric."
After Murie released his study, coyote control in Yellowstone ceased, and the maligned species began to flourish. Now, without any wolves and only a few mountain lions next to the threatened grizzly bear. So park managers decided in 1989 to gather baseline information on coyotes in the wake of the 1988 forest fires and in the face of potential wolf reintroduction, bogged down in political rhetoric for years. If wolves -- the one missing link in the park's ecosystem -- are ever restored, it would be a spectacular opportunity to watch the effects one predator species would have on another.
"It's an incredibly crucial question to answer," Crabtree says. "The park's foresight here could give us the knowledge we need to manage national parks as the true ecosystems they should he and as models for other ecosystems in need of restoration."
Biologists suspect that major predators, sitting at the top of any food chain, are one of the most important factors in the entire structure and diversity of an ecosystem. They affect how and where other species live and, consequently, which live and which die. Research in South America has shown that, by control the growth patterns and success of plants in the jungle.
SIMILAR EVENTS could be happening in Yellowstone. There are somewhere around 400 coyotes living in the park's lower elevation northern range, where Crabtree's study is concentrating. Coyotes prey on both small rodents -- lots of mice, pocket gophers, and meadow voles (Murie found that rodents and grasshoppers comprise 60 percent of a coyote's diet) -- and larger mammals like elk, antelope, and deer. If present, wolves would prey mostly on the larger mammals, while red foxes, strangely rare in Yellowstone, prey almost exclusively on the smaller rodents, which probably consume more grasses than any other animal class. More numerous than they would be if wolves were present, Yellowstone coyotes take up territory and prey that foxes normally would use, preventing extra fox predation on vegetarian rodents.
Yellowstone coyotes should fare better than their brethren on Isle Royale if wolves return to the park. When wolves first crossed ice-covered Lake Superior to arrive on were abundant there. After a few years, wolves had crowded coyotes into invisibility, while fox populations boomed. Now, there is a healthy population of red foxes, some wolves, and no coyotes.
Unlike the smaller, confined environment of Isle Royale, Yellowstone is large enough to accommodate both wolves and coyotes. If wolves return to Yellowstone, coyotes would almost certainly decline but not disappear, Crabtree says. Wolves would take up much, but perhaps not all, of the slack in influencing big game herds. No longer competing against so many coyotes, fox populations could also rebound, eating even more rodents than coyotes do now, and thus allowing the park's grasslands to further prosper. That would mean more forage for big game, and more big game would mean more food for wolves and coyotes It's a never-ending, hypothetical merry-go-round of causes and effects "There are a lot of theories about the role of predators in molding ecological communities," Crabtree says. "Here's our
Making the most of that chance, however, is a complicated business, requiring both manual labor and advanced research and analytical techniques. Crabtree and his team of volunteers and paid workers will spend hours tracking coyotes with radio transmitters, watching them through binoculars, collecting coyote scats to determine the animals' population density and diet, and mapping the creatures' sovereign territories.
Since last fall, the study team has captured 37 adult coyotes from 13 territorial packs, examining and marking them in a systematic 45-minute process. With smelly lures simulating coyote scents, researchers set padded jaw traps with a shock absorber to keep from injuring the coyote. A radio transmitter alerts researchers when the trap is sprung, so they can be on the scene within minutes after an animal is caught
First, the group blindfolds the coyote to keep it calm, takes its body temperature, and checks it for shock. Researchers then weigh and measure the coyote and take a blood sample, to be used for nutritional analysis and. They look for distinguishing characteristics -- scars usually prove an animal as the dominant, or "alpha" member of a pack -- and administer antibiotics to prevent any infection. Finally, they strap a radio collar around the coyote's neck. Since newborn pups are perhaps most telling of the coyote population's future, Crabtree's team also captured and examined 13 of the young Instead of using radio collars, which can not expand to accommodate the juveniles' growth, veterinarians implanted a plastic-encased transmitter in the creatures' abdominal cavities. Equivalent to only about three percent of a three-pound pup's weight, and less as it grows, the harmless but permanent implant is not as intrusive as a radio collar might be.
Most coyote studies have reported roughly one inadvertent death for every 20 animals captured. But after more than 200 captures, Crabtree has not recorded a single death in Yellowstone or during his other studies of coyotes at California's Mono Lake and Washington's Hanford Nuclear Reservation.
With the animals stations, cloistered from the view of visitors, to follow coyotes through their daily routine They have pinpointed the creatures more than 5,000 times, mapping each location to establish the boundaries of coyote territories. Coyotes generally rest during the day and grow active as dusk approaches -- patrolling their territory and foraging for food. They rest again for a few hours in the middle of the night, and then go back on the prowl until shortly after dawn. Coyotes are known to be smart and keenly adaptable, traits that helped them survive the violent campaigns that quickly claimed their fellow predators. They eat grasshoppers, crickets, and even ants, and killed roughly 40 percent of elk calves under study in northern Yellowstone's Lamar Valley. Coyotes have probably benefitted from 1988's fires, which opened and fertilized areas for grasses and shrubs that are important to small rodent species, boosting the predator food supply.
Hanging around picnic areas, coyotes also take full advantage of park visitors who illegally offer them handouts. Rangers trying go undercover, wearing plain clothes and driving unmarked vehicles because the coyotes learned to recognize their uniforms and patrol cars.
Researchers have noticed that Yellowstone's coyotes -- the biggest of the species in North America -- tend to function in packs, a characteristic not generally recognized among most western coyotes. Each pack includes a dominant breeding male and female as well as several young "helpers" or "biders," so called because they are biding their time before leaving the group. By watching specific pups, Crabtree hopes to determine when and why young coyotes leave the pack: do the more capable pups set out first? Do their parents force them out? Do they start a new pack or join an established one?
Although their packs are smaller, Yellowstone coyotes have a social structure very similar to that of wolves; the one difference is that while some coyote pups usually strike out on their own after a summer with their parents, young wolves generally stay with their parents through the first winter to bring down their larger prey, and young wolves can not survive solely on easily caught rodents as coyotes can.
But there are notable differences between coyotes in Yellowstone and those in other parts of the West, where they are targets of government trappers who, to keep land safe for livestock, poison them, shoot them from airplanes, and dig up their dens to kill their pups. In natural areas like Yellowstone, researchers have found an annual average of two to three newborn pups per territory, while exploited populations generally average about five to eight per territory. That means that in areas where coyotes are hunted heavily, they reproduce more quickly to repopulate vacant domains.
Those coyotes that do take over vacant territories are often young and inexperienced and hunt alone rather than in packs. Not having secured status, they may turn to killing more sheep, a veritable fast food, than those that were there before. And several federal studies have also proven that coyotes kill the most prey -- whether young. So by killing coyotes indiscriminately and leading them to produce more young at an earlier age, control agents may actually be boosting coyote predation when they are really trying to lower it.
Coming up against coyote's instinctive cunning, efforts to kill them off may have backfired even more than we realize. Early rangers and ranchers, by poisoning carcasses in hopes of killing predators, destroyed those animals that scavenged on already dead animals, and probably taught coyotes to kill fresh meat. Hunters shoot the most visible and vulnerable coyotes, sparing those most skilled at stealth and hiding. Despite persecution that annually kills up to 70 percent of their populations in some places, coyotes have not only not died off, they have actually expanded their range toward the East Coast. In short, some biologists think, predator control efforts have turned the mythic coyote into an American "superpredator," more evasive and inclined to kill than any that existed before. Yet a new draft environmental impact statement prepared by the Department activities, proposes continuing current programs. The document did not consider preliminary results of the Yellowstone study or any other research on unexploited coyote populations.
"We know so little about them, and yet we spent millions and millions of dollars trying to get rid of them; it's a complete fiasco," says Hornocker, one of the first to question predator control programs. "In many cases; the best control is no control at all; they will limit their own numbers if you just leave them alone."
With its protected status, Yellowstone is home to what is probably one of the most stable coyote populations in the United States, making its study even more important to knowledge of the coyote as a species. When wolves return, the habits and lives of both coyotes and their prey will change; but that grand experiment, too, will reveal dramatic clues to the true nature of natural systems. For while coyotes have resisted human wrath for years, they may not do.
As the receiver keeps on ticking off the radio beacon of a far-off coyote, Crabtree jots down the hidden creature's coordinates. "That's where it is right now," the biologist says. "Who knows what Hill be happening here in ten years. Will there be wolves or coyotes or more elk or fewer elk or better forage? Whatever it is, if all the pieces are in place, it will be closer to the real Yellowstone."
PHOTO (COLOR): Pups are usually strong enough to crawl out of the den when they are three to four weeks old.
PHOTO (COLOR): The highly adaptable coyote is one of the enduring symbols of the American West.
PHOTO (COLOR): With the help of radio collars, researchers can follow coyotes through their daily routines, offering insight into the predator's role in molding Yellowstone's ecological communities.
PHOTO (COLOR): A volunteer removes a puppy from its den for examination and in examining and tracking coyote young because they are perhaps most indicative of the population's future.
PHOTO (COLOR): The coyote is the fastest North American canid, cruising at 25 to 30 miles per hour and capable of bursts of 40 miles per hour.
PHOTO (COLOR): Life for Yellowstone's coyotes will be much different if wolves return.
Michael Milstein, a reporter for the Billings Gazette and a former park ranger, last wrote for National Parks on the worldwide disappearance of frogs.
By Michael Milstein

Finding beauty in even the most banal objects, Diana Kurz fashions decorative still lifes and flower paintings. She emphasizes her works' two-dimensionality by using bright colors and patterns.
Diana Kurz first started painting flowers when she was living in Paris in 1985. "I was a transient," explains the artist, whose luminous oil paintings are infused with sensual, glowing colors. "My studio apartment was small and bare, but I didn't really want to buy anything too large or permanent with which to furnish it. So when I found this wonderful shop nearby where I could buy fresh-cut flowers, I decided to buy some and use them in my paintings.
"At one time, I hadn't wanted to paint flowers because they changed so quickly," she continues, "but in Paris, they were so readily available that I couldn't resist using them. I realized I could capture the moment of a flower's life and make it endure." Kurz says that her intention in painting the flowers was "to make painting." She adds, "I also wanted to make the rest of the picture as full of life and the potential for change as the flowers themselves. In a way, the paintings are memorials for flowers that have been cut down before the end of their natural lives."
Kurz immortalized the flowers by placing them in an environment in which the foregrounds and backgrounds took on equal significance. Favoring rich color and pattern over the conventional illusion of three-dimensional space, her still lifes seem to express French painter Maurice Denis's statement that "a picture -- before being a war-horse, a female nude, or some anecdote -- is essentially a flat surface covered with colors in a particular order." Brightly colored blossoms are placed in front of flowered fabrics, patterned backdrops, and other paintings, prints, or postcards. In particular, many of Kurz's pictures incorporate reproductions of paintings that have influenced her -- images by artists from Giotto to Matisse. In Lilies and Carnations for example, the detail of one of her favorite paintings, a still life by fifteenth-century master Hugo van der Goes.
"I want the viewer to question what is in front," she says, describing her intentions to completely integrate the subject and its setting. In Porcelain Figures and Tulips, for example, a pale blue and brown flowered vase holding pale tulips has been placed against a deep blue cloth covered with a pattern of pink blossoms. The tulips merge with the flowers on the fabric behind them, creating an illusion of flatness in the painting. The figurines and vase sit on a flowered, light-yellow tablecloth, furthering the sense of two-dimensionality by extending the "bouquet" in all directions.
Kurz's figure paintings support this two-dimensionality as well. In Double Francesca, for example, the artist plays with the shallow space within the picture by juxtaposing the figure of a lithe blond woman with a painting of the same model reclining. Kurz says that the painting is intended to represent two aspects of the a model and felt she had a complex, multifaceted personality, which I wanted to portray in the painting."
Juxtapositions of both style and content add another level of meaning to Kurz's work. She combines not only patterns with assurance, but styles as well. "I'm interested in mixing cultures in my paintings," she states, pointing out that in Flowers and Sukeroku, she included a well-known Kabuki figure behind chrysanthemums, a symbol of the Japanese emperor, which she combined with lilies and gladiolus, flowers that are typically associated with Western art, Sukeroku, seen on a fabric print behind the vase of flowers, seems poised in action, denying the image's flatness. Contrasts between the scale of objects also play an important role. In this painting, for example, the head of the figure is only as large as the head of a flower. In addition, all of the objects are life-size or larger, not only in this painting but in nearly all her work contrast in painting as being similar to musical counterpoint. Her love of contrast is evinced in her placement of the elegant flowers in awkward ceramic vases or clumsy pots. "I used these vessels because of their lack of conventional beauty and elegance," she explains. "They are meant to contradict people's notions of fine-art objects."
The intensity of color in a typical Kurz painting -- expressed in vibrant pinks, greens, and blues that recall the radiant colors of the Fauves -- contributes to the life of the work and also creates an equal emphasis on the painting's surface. Therefore, there is no fixed center of interest in the painting; the viewer's eye travels all over the picture. In Lilies and Carnations, the equally vivid purples of the walls and blues of the table level out the planes in the picture.
The surface of Kurz's paintings is significant not only in terms of composition but in the way she handles the paint itself. One critic, writing in light and color." and added that "Kurz's brush touches all with an incandescence that is highly seductive. Pinks, soft greens, oranges, reds, and lavenders are part of every area. Her impressionistic way of using paint and color results in surfaces that are fluid and lush."
Says Kurz, "I use oil paint because it has a transparency and luminosity you can not get with other mediums. Oil also allows me to work over a long period of time in many thin layers, which gives a glow to the work. I love the feeling of the paint, its texture." Last winter, Kurz saw the large exhibition of Titian's work at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, and was very much affected by the show. In particular, she found the luminosity of Titian's paintings, which he achieved by using layer upon layer of glazes, very moving, and she became inspired to use glazes even more frequently in her own paintings influence in shaping Kurz's work was her first sojourn to Paris, on a Fulbright fellowship, in 1965-66 (she returned twenty years later, on a studio grant awarded by the American Center in Paris, and stayed in the same apartment she had lived in earlier). There, in 1985, the artist, who is constantly going to museums and studying art books to supplement her own painting ideas, read Matisse's writings and was influenced by his thoughts on the color black. She explains, "He said that it should be as radiant and luminous as any other color in the painting." This idea inspired her to paint Lilies and Carnations, which features flowers in a black vase. She says she wanted to make this vase "as volumetric as it would be if it were any other color."
During her first trip to France, Kurz was strongly influenced by the paintings she saw in European museums. The most meaningful were those of Bonnard and Matisse, the latter for combine flat patterns with flowered backgrounds. In addition, the visit was particularly significant since it was in Paris that she became friendly with the well-known painter Jean Helion. Helion's own development from abstraction to representation exerted a strong influence on the young artist, who now credits him with, she says, "being a catalyst for my celebration of the real world."
When she returned to the United States in 1967, Kurz began to teach herself to draw from the model, a skill she never had the opportunity to develop in school since Abstract Expressionism had been stressed to the exclusion of traditional academic drawing. Unbeknownst to her Abstract Expressionist friends, she went to the figure-drawing sessions at the National Academy of Design in New York City. She continued working from the model with a group of older, more-established artists for several years.
Process is extremely important to Kurz, who studied with Ralph Mayer, the late painter and art-materials expert, at Columbia University. From him, she proudly relates the notes I took in his class and I refer to them all the time," she says. She also feels it was a privilege to have studied anatomy with Robert Beverly Hale. As a result of her training, Kurz has great respect for her materials and takes excellent care of them. (Some of her brushes are more than fifteen years old.) She keeps her supplies very clean and buys the best she can afford-she uses mostly Old Holland paints. She recently discovered Gamblin Artists Colors's Alkyd Painting Medium No. 1, which, she says, she likes very much because "it dries quickly but has a distinct luminosity." She favors Robert Simmons and Langnickel brushes; her chosen surface is either Claussens double-lead-primed linen or Belgian linen that she prepares herself with a traditional rabbitskin-glue and white-lead priming. Kurz strives for freshness above all in her paintings. "I'm constantly washing my paintings down so they look spontaneous -- as if they have happened quickly even though they take a long time to change an area, she washes it down with turpentine and repaints it completely.
In choosing a setup, the artist works hard to make the arrangement look "unconventional and unposed." Vegetable Soup, for example, is part of a series of long, horizontal paintings she calls "tablescapes," which she intends to be viewed more like landscapes than like traditional still lifes.
Kurz usually spends as long as several days devising an arrangement for a still life. "I don't start with a preconceived idea," she explains. "Usually I don't know what's going to work until I see it. I'm always looking for something that speaks to me. Something may trigger an idea -- a grouping of colors or objects or flowers, or another painting -- but it doesn't always work the way I think it will when I get it set up in the studio. Often, the resulting work is nothing like what I think it's going to be. time, Kurz finds that a single painting can take up to three years to develop. "It takes a while for me to find a solution to a problem," she explains. As a rule, Kurz's paintings come together slowly. She revises a great deal as she works toward complex forms, usually making watercolors, charcoal drawings, and pastels that are conceived as independent works. Most of her drawings take from nine to twelve hours to create. In Still Life With Weller Vase, she says, "I tried to limit myself to just two or three colors; I wanted to use the pastel as a drawing medium rather than filling everything in."
Knowledge of her subject matter -- whether flowers, figures, or objects -- is derived through these drawings. Kurz carefully evaluates each drawing and then expands the linear compositions into value studies. Once this step has been accomplished, a value drawing is traced several times, creating a contour sketch that serves as a guide to the directions in her work. Initially, she painted in an abstract style developed in her graduate study with John Heliker at Columbia University. Eventually, however, she came to feel that the shapes and forms in her paintings were becoming too limited. "I was getting bored," she says. "I was doing paintings that other people liked, but I felt I was setting up problems I already knew how to solve. It's always been important to me to work with the unknown," she continues, "-- with an element of surprise. And I found I wasn't being surprised anymore. When I was in school, decoration and pattern were considered minor and unimportant. I never would have dreamed I'd be making these flower paintings, which go against everything I grew up with as an artist."
Born in Vienna, Austria, Kurz received her B.F.A. degree from Brandeis University in Waltham, Massachusetts, and her M.F.A. degree from Columbia University in New York City. museums and galleries. "I am constantly aware of what is happening in the art world and what is fashionable, so my painting representationally is very much an informed choice," she says.
Kurz has exhibited her paintings nationally and internationally, and her artwork is in numerous private and corporate collections. In addition to her Fulbright fellowship, she has received numerous awards and grants, including those from the New York Foundation for the Arts, and has had residencies at New Hampshire's MacDowell Colony, the Millay Colony for the Arts in Austerlitz, New York, the Vermont Studio Colony and Yaddo in Saratoga Springs, New York. Last year, her flower paintings were exhibited at the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens. She recently had a solo show at the Thomas Center Gallery in Gainesville, Florida.
PHOTO (COLOR): Left: Porcelain Figures and Tulips, 1988, oil, 48 x 40. All artworks this article collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): Right: Self-portrait With Monette PHOTO (COLOR): Top: Double Francesca, 1981, oil, 56 x 72.
PHOTO (COLOR): Above: Still Life With Weller Vase, 1983, pastel, 22 x 30.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page: Flowers and Sukeroku, 1989, oil, 31 x 27.
PHOTO (COLOR): Top: August Flowers, 1990, oil, 24 x 22.
PHOTO (COLOR): Above: Vegetable Soup, 1989, oil, 13 x 47.
PHOTO (COLOR): Left: Three Pears and a Lemon, 1989, oil, 14 x 13.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page: Lilies and Carnations, 1988, oil, 31 x 27.
BY LAURIE S. HURWITZ

Laurie S. Hurwitz is the senior editor of American Artist.
Section: AMERICAN HERITAGE
EXACTLY A YEAR FROM NOW THE WORLD WILL BE MARKING THE FIVE HUNDREDTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT EVENT OF THE PAST MILLENNIUM. THE ZEAL OF ONE MAN BROUGHT ABOUT THAT EVENT, AND HIS NAME AND TALK OF HIS ACHIEVEMENTS WILL BE OMNIPRESENT. HERE, THEN, IS A COLUMBUS CATECHISM TO HELP YOU THROUGH THE MONTHS AHEAD: WAS HE REALLY THE FIRST? IF HE SAILED FOR SPAIN, WHY DO ITALIANS MAKE SUCH A FUSS ABOUT HIS BIRTHDAY? HOW COME AMERICA IS N'T NAMED FOR HIM? WHY IS HE BEING CALLED A VILLAIN NOW? DID COLUMBUS DISCOVER THE NEW WORLD?
No. But how pleased he would have been to learn that he is often credited with discovering two vast, far-flung continents whose size and variety he could scarcely have begun to imagine. Those continents had been populated for millennia by a mix of peoples whose cultures were as diverse as their lands. They may have migrated from northeastern Asia more than fifteen thousand years ago. When they came is still a matter of warring scholarship, but
Columbus met only a small number of them after he had successfully navigated the Ocean Sea, as the Atlantic was then known. His disclosure of their existence baffled Renaissance Europe but eventually led to knowledge of an entire new hemisphere. The Genoese mariner made the announcement of his triumphant crossing in a letter addressed to his Spanish patrons, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. He declared that he had "found very many islands filled with people without number, and of them all I have taken possession for their Highnesses, by proclamation and with the royal standard displayed, and nobody objected." This arrogant usurpation was wholly in line with Europe's determination to expand its ordained and Christian world.
There are claims that other explorers crossed the Ocean Sea long before Columbus. St. Brendan and the Irish are credited with the earliest voyages, dating from the opening phase of the Middle Ages in the seventh century. The Vikings touched base in the far northern lands during the eleventh century, as did Bristol seamen four extraordinary feat of navigation in 1492 that the presence of a New World was revealed to the wonderment of the Old.
Of course, the term New World is thoroughly Eurocentric. But it's convenient, it's here to stay, and we shall use it. WHAT EXACTLY DID HE DO IN 1492?
He sailed west from the Canary Islands following an ocean route he had mapped and survived a thirty-three-day trip to make landfall in a new world on October 12.
For years people had scoffed at the idea of a westward route to the Indies. The success of Columbus's trip was due as much to his passionate belief in what he was doing as to his enlightened decision to sail west-southwest from the Canary Islands along the twenty-eighth parallel, thus avoiding the treacherous counter winds of higher latitudes. Had he invoked the words of the great Italian poet as he embarked? Dante had written in The Divine Comedy, "And turning our stern towards the morning we made wings of our oars for" It is doubtful that Columbus's ships would have survived a more northerly crossing. WAS COLUMBUS THE FIRST TO BELIEVE THE EARTH WAS ROUND?
Not at all. Every educated man in his day believed it was a sphere, and every European university taught the concept in geography classes. There were, of course, some who clung to the ancient biblical notions that the earth was a flat disk with Jerusalem in the center and that one could fall off the edge. But seamen like Columbus knew better from practical experience: They saw that mountains appeared on the horizon before the land came into view and that the hulls of departing ships disappeared before the masts.
The controversial issue in Columbus's day was not the earth's shape but its size. This had enormous implications for the explorer's ambitious plans. Geographers projected widely divergent calculations, but they shared a common belief that the earth was much smaller than it is, some gauging it at two-thirds of its actual circumference. In the third guess at the world's true belt size of twenty-four thousand miles. Among those who inspired Columbus were Marinus of Tyre and Ptolemy, both of the second century A.D., and Pierre d'Ailly and Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, geographers of his own century. Columbus shared with the last two a firm belief that the Ocean Sea was navigable.
Toscanelli's concepts were particularly appealing because the Florentine not only had put forward low figures for the width of the ocean on a world chart but, as early as 1474, had urged the Portuguese king to consider a voyage westward to Cathay (China). When Columbus subsequently used Toscanelli's chart to substantiate his claim that he could cross the Ocean Sea, he further reduced its low mileage estimates. WHERE DID HE THINK HE WAS GOING?
He hoped to reach the Indies. That was the geographic term then in use for the eastern stretches of Asia, which included the fabled land of Cathay, the island of Cipangu (Japan), Burma, India to the Indies had for some time been the goal of Portuguese princes who sought a nautical path to trade in Oriental silks and spices. Convinced the way lay eastward via the southern coast of Africa, they staunchly backed the repeated attempts of their navigators to find it. Columbus was aware of these forays but stubbornly held to his view that the most direct route to the Indies lay not eastward but westward, by the Ocean Sea. He expected he might pass some islands along the way, but he had no idea he would come upon new continents. WHAT WERE HIS SHIPS LIKE?
Columbus sailed with a diminutive fleet of three-masted vessels: the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria. The Nina and the Pinta, classed as caravels, measured at about sixty tons each -- that is, they could carry sixty Spanish tuns, a liquid measure, of wine. Lightly constructed, caravels were known for their speed. The Santa Maria was classed as a nao (a Spanish word for somewhat larger vessel was round and chunky, less graceful-looking than the caravels, and definitely less maneuverable.
Columbus was proud of his ships, as well he might be, since all three made it on a blind journey to a phantom destination. Still, he did have his troubles with them. On the third day out, the rudder of the Pinta jumped. He wrote in his diary that it was repaired off the Canary Islands "with great labor and diligence of the Admiral." There, too, the Nina, which was lateen-rigged (outfitted with triangular sails hung at a forty-five- to sixty-degree angle to the deck), had to be fitted with square sails on yards parallel to the deck. Lateens could sail closer to the wind, but square-rigged vessels were easier to maneuver.
The Santa Maria was Columbus's flagship, but the Nina became his favorite (Nina was a nickname; the craft's true name was the Santa Clara). The Santa Maria ran aground in the. Measured against today's transoceanic vessels, Renaissance ships were pitifully small. Their average length of seventy to one hundred feet would be dwarfed by the nearly one thousand sleek feet of the Queen Elizabeth 2. IF PEOPLE WERE ALREADY LIVING THERE, WHY DID THEY CALL IT THE NEW WORLD?
The phrase Mundus Novus (New World) was coined by a Venetian printer in 1504. He lit on it as a title for a letter written by the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci following the latter's return from newly discovered Brazil. The phrase caught on. The revelation of an entirely unknown and inhabited world, credited to Vespucci, was far more sensational than Columbus's report of a few islands and a new route to the Indies.
Moreover, Vespucci's description of the New World, laden as it was with vivid accounts of cannibalism and sexual promiscuity among the natives, assured his account instant popularity. Columbus himself never used the phrase New World. His own characterization of the lands he discovered was That other world was, of course, not new, but to this day we tend to date the history of the Americas in terms of the five centuries since Columbus's landing there -- the relatively brief span since European intervention. Shakespeare comes to the point in The Tempest when he has Miranda exclaim, "O brave new world, / That has such people in 't!" and Prospero replies, "'T is new to thee." WHERE DID COLUMBUS THINK HE WAS WHEN HE MADE HIS LANDFALL?
He had no real idea. He imagined that he had reached the Indies, and he promptly spoke of the natives he encountered as Indians. But nothing he saw in the Caribbean coincided with descriptions of the East. Instead of sophisticated Orientals dressed in sumptuous brocaded coats, he found naked inhabitants who seemed gentle and naive. Instead of the glittering city with golden-roofed temples that Marco Polo had recounted, there were simple huts. It was all rather baffling. Columbus pressed on from which he named La Isla Juana, he followed its coast west. "I found it to be so long," he wrote, "that I thought it must be the mainland, the province of Catayo in China. And since there were neither towns nor cities on the coast, but only small villages, with the people of which I could not have speech because they all fled forthwith, I went forward on the same course, thinking that I should not fail to find great cities and towns."
Although no glittering citadels appeared on the horizon, the explorer and his sailors were quick to notice that the natives wore small gold pendants as nose ornaments, and Columbus took this as a sign that the Bahamian island on which he had first landed, which he called San Salvador, would perhaps turn out to be a steppingstone to Cathay.
His subsequent discovery of gold on the large island he named Hispaniola convinced him and his men that they had indeed landed in the outer reaches when he commenced his return voyage to Spain on January 4, 1493. HOW DID HE COME UP WITH HIS IDEA IN THE FIRST PLACE?
Nobody knows. But one thing is certain: It was not an original idea. A westward route had been suggested as far back as Aristotle. Columbus's interest in finding such a route may have arisen around 1476, when he was shipwrecked off the coast of Portugal and took up residence in Lisbon. At that time Portugal stood proudly at the head of European navigation. Columbus was then twenty-five years old. Intensely religious, he found his geographic convictions strengthened by passages from the Bible and from such predictions as one in Seneca's Medea: "An age will come after many years when the Ocean will loose the chains of things, and a great part of the earth will be opened up and a new sailor such as the one who was Jason's guide... will reveal a new world." Columbus longed to be that sailor. Years. He first presented the petition for his "Enterprise of the Indies," as he called it, to King John II of Portugal in 1484 or a bit earlier. It was turned over to a commission of experts just as it would be today. They rejected it.
When Columbus turned to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain for support in 1486, his proposal was submitted to an assemblage of Spanish scholars and ecclesiastics known as the Talavera Commission. Again a rejection. The commission ruled that the distance was far greater than Columbus claimed, and the enterprise therefore not feasible. They were right on the first count, wrong on the second. Over the years Columbus persisted. Finally, through the intervention of Luis de Santangel, the keeper of the privy purse, who had befriended him at the Spanish court, he obtained Queen Isabella's permission in the spring of 1492. "By these presents," announced the royal decree, "we dispatch the noble man Christoforus Colon with of India for certain reasons and purposes." HOW CAN SO MANY NATIONS CLAIM COLUMBUS AS ONE OF THEIR OWN?
Rival claims follow in the wake of any heroic accomplishment. Columbus was born in Genoa of Italian parents in 1451, and it has been insisted that he was a full-blooded Spaniard, a Catalan, or a Jew of Portuguese or Catalan descent, but the evidence suggests that he was a Catholic of Genoese origin. Whatever his background, he basked in that wondrous confluence of Arab, Jewish, and Christian genius that marked the intellectual world of Portugal and Spain during the early Renaissance. The undisputed facts are that his father was Domenico Colombo, and his mother was Susanna Fontanarossa, both of Genoa. They had two younger sons, Bartolomeo and Giacomo (later known as Diego), and a daughter, Bianchinetta. The family business was weaving. Domenico managed a decent living as a member of the clothiers' guild, but his prospects for improvement were never very bright.
Columbus living in Portugal and then Spain and acquiring their languages, he taught himself to read and write. He also taught himself Latin, the medium of communication of educated men; many of the books on which he relied for his navigational theories were in Latin.
In his writings Columbus more than once described himself as un estranjero. Indeed, the Spanish officers and sailors who were eventually to serve under him often resented the fact that he was a "foreigner." Although the population of fifteenth-century Spain was of a distinctly cosmopolitan mix, a fierce wave of nationalism was on the rise by the time Columbus settled there. The same year he sailed, Spain conquered the last of the Moors and ordered the expulsion of all unconverted Jews. HOW DID COLUMBUS FIND HIS WAY?
A compass, dead reckoning, and luck. Latitude and longitude existed as concepts, but both were shrouded in guesswork. Latitude was reckoned by Ptolemaic climata -- parallel zones arbitrarily laid down on a chart in terms of climate longest day of the year, found to be directly proportional to the angular height of the sun. Longitude was arrived at through a complicated procedure by timing an eclipse. Like most mariners, Columbus couldn't manage it.
His indispensable instrument was a mariner's compass. A combination of the ancient "rose of the winds" and a magnetized needle, the compass had been in use long before Columbus sailed. Known by the Chinese, Arabs, and Phoenicians, it had been rediscovered by the Europeans in the fourteenth century. In Columbus's day the rose was a circular card on which a pattern of diamonds, lozenges, and lines marked the thirty-two compass points. No letters were used because most seamen could not read. Twelve winds were known to the ancients, but by Columbus's time the number had been reduced to eight; we indicate them today as N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW.
Perhaps most important, Columbus was a master down compass courses, noting speed through the water, charting direction and strength of winds, being aware of currents, and constantly picking up where you had left off.
His double crossing over the "sea of darkness" is a near miracle of dead reckoning. WHAT QUALIFICATIONS DID HE BRING TO THE JOB?
He had sailed in the Mediterranean and had been to Africa, England, Ireland, and allegedly as far north as Iceland. Having grown up in the maritime community of Genoa, he had begun seafaring when he was fourteen years old. At least that's what he says in his chronicles, though neither the records nor his claims are completely reliable. He also tells us in his log for December 21, 1492, that by then he had been at sea for twenty-three years "without leaving it for any time worth telling."
We have very little data on what kinds of ships he sailed on, in what capacities, or under whose banners. In any event Middle Ages. It was the Genoese marine that the pope called upon during the First Crusade, in the eleventh century, to conduct a massive fleet from the southern ports of France to the eastern shores of the Mediterranean. During the following centuries, as the Mediterranean bustled with commerce and political intrigue, the republic of Genoa rose in power along with the republic of Venice. By the end of the thirteenth century the Cenoese were attempting to find a water route to the Indies by way of Africa and in the process sailed far out into the Ocean Sea -- or, as it was also known, the" green sea of gloom. "DID HE HAVE ANY REAL IDEA OF THE RISKS HE WAS RUNNING?
He certainly did. But he was deeply devout, charged with a messianic zeal, and determined to take risks. Shipwrecks, drownings, mutinies, scurvy, gales, starvation -- all were part of every sailor's job at the time. The Renaissance poet Luis de Camoens detailed the the dangers of the Deep (Which humane Judgment can not comprehend) Suddain and fearfull storms, the Ayre that sweep; Lightning, that with the Ayre the Fire doe blend; Black Hurracans; thick Nights; Thunders, that keep The World alarm'd, and threaten the Last end. Would be too tedious; indeed vain and mad, Though a brasse Tongue, and Iron lungs I had.
Nevertheless, Columbus believed that the mariner must, as he put it, probe "the secrets of this world."
Seneca had prophesied, "The time will come when every land shall yield its hidden treasure; when men no more shall unknown course measure, for round the world no' farthest land' shall be." Columbus knew such words well. They fired his imagination and allayed his fears. HOW DID COLUMBUS RECRUIT HIS CREW?
Columbus was a stranger at Palos de la Frontera, the small coastal town where the Spanish monarchs had made provision for two of his ships or officers and was therefore obliged to rely on the help of two prominent seafaring families. The more powerful was that of Martin Pinzon of Palos; the other was the family of Juan Nino, of the nearby Andalusian town of Moguer. Together with Columbus, the Pinzons and Ninos managed to recruit about ninety men and boys for the three vessels. Martin Pinzon himself assumed command of the Pinta, while Juan Nino (with whom Columbus developed a close friendship) sailed as master of the Nina.
We know the names of all but three of those who signed on for the epochal trip. They came primarily from towns and villages in Andalusia; all but four were Spaniards. Columbus was, of course, one of the foreigners. Each ship had a master, a captain, a pilot, a marshal, and a surgeon, supported by the usual complement of able seamen and cabin boys.
Did they sign on eagerly? Not everyone. Experienced sailors questioned the feasibility of such a trip the crown, and despite legends to the contrary, no prisoners were used to pad the crews.
One officer on board the flagship Santa Maria was the scholar Luis de Torres, a converted Jew who could speak Arabic. He was meant to be the interpreter between Columbus and the grand khan of China. Columbus, of course, never encountered the grand khan, and a leader of China wouldn't have been likely to speak Arabic anyway, but Europeans believed that all languages stemmed from that tongue, and therefore it was best to be prepared. WHY IS N'T THE NEW WORLD NAMED FOR HIM?
If the New World was destined to be named by Europeans, it should have been named after Columbus. A more appropriate European name would have been North and South Columbia. But the two continents were named instead after Amerigo Vespucci, who voyaged to the New World after Columbus. The name America was assigned by an Alsatian geographer named Martin Waldseemuller when he attempted to chart the New World discoveries himself, Waldseemuller believed the glory to be his. That Vespucci was indisputably the more popular explorer at this time we learn from Thomas More's Utopia, a book based on the Florentine's accounts: "Everyone's reading about the four voyages of Vespucci."
Renaissance geographers were skilled and conscientious scientists, but as they worked to locate obscure New World islands on their charts, they found the data vague and often misleading. The mapmakers could only put faith in intelligent guesses, a course taken by Waldseemuller when he charted the discoveries of Columbus, Vespucci, and other early explorers as one continuous, continental land strip. By this bold and imaginative step, he in effect introduced a new hemisphere. The name America had been suggested for this new land mass by a fellow geographer and poet named Matthias Ringman. "I don't see why anyone should justly forbid naming it Amerige," he wrote, "land of Americus as it were, after its discoverer Americus, a man of true Asia have received their IS IT TRUE THAT COLUMBUS'S FLEET BROUGHT SYPHILIS BACK FROM THE NEW WORLD?
The disease indeed made its first epidemic appearance in Europe following Columbus's first voyage, when camp followers spread it among the soldiers of King Charles Vlll during the French monarch's 1494 campaign to seize the kingdom of Naples. Several tracts of the period discuss the outbreak and indicate that until then the morbus gallicus (French disease) had been unknown in Europe. Many scholars hold that it was spread among women infected by Spanish soldiers who had sailed with Columbus to the New World and contracted it there. Whether or not the affliction had existed in Europe before, its first virulent manifestations did date from the Neapolitan campaign.
Columbus is silent on the subject in his writings. In any case, it was not a fit topic to raise with Queen Isabella, for whom, together with King Ferdinand, his reports were intended. But the Spanish chronicler Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdes wrote of the. In his General History of the Indies, published in 1535, he discourses on it at some length, claiming that "up to the time King Charles passed through there Italy, no such plague had been seen in those lands. But the truth is that from this island of Haiti or Hispaniola this disease spread to Europe, as has been said; and it is a very common thing here among the Indians, and they know how to cure it, and have very excellent herbs, trees and plants appropriate to this and other infirmities...."
The disease became known in Europe by a string of names, most of them imputing blame for its spread: the French Pox, the German Sickness, the Polish Disease. Around 1512 Girolamo Fracastoro, an Italian physician and poet, wrote a Latin poem dramatizing the disorder's importation from the New World. He called the work "Syphilis or Morbus Gallicus," after a young shepherd named Syphilus who had invoked the wrath of the gods, is known to this day. DID COLUMBUS MAKE ANY ATTEMPT AT COLONIZING ON HIS FIRST VOYAGE?
Yes, but it was catastrophic. The tiny settlement was called La Navidad because the plan to set it up was made on Christmas Day of 1492. Located in a shallow bay off the northeast coast of the large island that Columbus called Hispaniola, the site was not the most advantageous, but then Columbus had not exactly chosen it. Nor had it been his intention to establish a colony. The heady step of planting Europeans in the New World came about as the result of the shipwreck of the Santa Maria. While Columbus slept on Christmas Eve, his helmsman ran the flagship aground on the reefs of a Haitian bay.
Ever optimistic, the explorer decided to interpret the woeful disaster as a sign "that our Lord had caused me to run aground at this place so that I might establish a settlement here." He had a tower and a fortress constructed out of the ship's timbers, since word had got around that gold mines lay not far off in the territory of Cibao, a location that Columbus took to be the local name for Cipangu (Japan). Thirty-nine men, including three officers, were chosen to be the first Spanish settlers in the New World. Columbus left them with artillery, a year's supply of bread and wine, seeds, merchandise for trading, and the Santa Maria's small boat. He was confident that when he returned to the New World, the colony would be nothing less than a storehouse of gold. But only desolation greeted him on his second trip, in November of 1493. In their greed for treasure and in their lust for local women, the colonists had quarreled with one another and antagonized the natives. None survived. TO WHOM DID COLUMBUS FIRST REPORT HIS TRIUMPH?
To the king who had turned him down. Columbus's ship was so battered on the return that he was forced to drop anchor in a Portuguese seaport's permission to enter the outer harbor of Lisbon, he presented himself to King John II of Portugal on March 9, 1493, accompanied by some of the native Americans whom he had brought back from the New World. Confronted with this evidence of the navigator's extraordinary discovery, the envious king attempted to make counterclaims of his own in the name of Portugal. After detaining Columbus for some tense days of interrogation, John II permitted the forty-two-year-old mariner to sail on.
Meanwhile, Columbus sent word of his discovery to the Spanish monarchs in Barcelona by a soon-to-be-famous letter that was forthwith printed and issued in many editions. A key passage reflects Columbus's pride in what he had done: "For although men have talked or written of these lands, all was conjecture, without getting a look at it, but amounted only to this, that those who heard for the most part listened and judged it more a fable than that there was anything in it, however small."
Columbus presented Isabella in Barcelona in late April 1493. By then he had already received the reward for which he had yearned: a communication from the Spanish monarchs welcoming him back, addressed to "Don Cristobal Colon Columbus, their Admiral of the Ocean Sea, Viceroy and Governor of the Islands that he hath discovered in the Indies." The illiterate sailor from Genoa had become a gentleman, an admiral, and a political power. WHAT HAPPENED TO THE SIX NATIVE AMERICANS COLUMBUS BROUGHT BACK TO SPAIN?
They were received ceremoniously. Columbus organized a grand procession to the Spanish court, and as the native Americans paraded through Barcelona in their exotic dress, crowds thronged to see them. What the Indians thought of it all, we shall never know.
In years ahead Columbus would exhibit a fierce authority over the inhabitants of the New World, but his first recorded impression of them is glowing: "Of anything they have, if you ask them for it, they never say no; rather they invite love as if they were giving their hearts; and whether the things be of value or of small price, at once they are content with whatever little thing of whatever kind may be given to them .... I gave them a thousand good, pleasing things which I had bought, in order that they might be fond of us, and furthermore might be made Christians and be inclined to the love and service of their Highnesses and of the whole Castilian nation, and try to help us and to give us of the things which they have in abundance and which are necessary to us."
Making them Christians was the highest priority. The six he brought back to Spain were promptly baptized and given Christian names, with King Ferdinand, Queen Isabella, and the infante Don Juan, their godparents. When Columbus embarked on his second voyage to the New World, in September of 1493, five of them returned with him. The sixth, named Don Juan, remained attached to the royal Spanish household TO THE NEW WORLD DID COLUMBUS MAKE?
Four -- in 1492, 1493, 1498, and 1502.
Columbus's second voyage was crowded with events, few of which redounded to the glory of either the explorer or Spain. Yet it began in the grandest manner. With a fleet of no fewer than seventeen ships and his imposing new title of admiral, Columbus set sail on September 25, 1493, from the ancient port city of Cadiz in Spain. The trip was to last more than two and a half years. Officially the goal was the expansion of Christendom through the acquisition of territories and the conversion of the New World natives, but the quest for gold always took priority. The admiral was instructed to ensure that the natives were "treated very well and lovingly" by all the Spanish expeditionaries. These numbered around thirteen hundred: gentlemen-adventurers, cavalry and infantry, farm laborers, a wide range of craftsmen, and five ecclesiastics to perform conversions. Horses were brought for the first other livestock, grains, and seeds. There were no women.
By November 3, all seventeen ships had successfully crossed the Ocean Sea. It was an amazing maritime feat; so large a Renaissance fleet had never gone so far in company. The fleet dropped anchor off a small Caribbean island, which Columbus named Marie Galante, after the nickname of his flagship.
There was much to be done. But first Columbus made his crew swear he was on the threshold of fabled Cathay. Having proved to the Renaissance world that the Ocean Sea was navigable, the admiral was now equally determined to prove that the Indies lay close to its western shores. As soon as he reached the New World on his second voyage, he began a systematic search for the Asian mainland. During nearly two months of the most skillful navigation, he made his way around hundreds of islands, giving many of them the names they hold today and describing the incomparable beauty of the region in terms evocative of a of Cuba "seemed to reach the sky" above springs of water "of such goodness and so sweet, that no better could be found in the world." His men rested on the grass "by those springs amid the scent of the flowers which was marvellous, and the sweetness of little birds, so many and so delightful, and under the shade of those palms so tall and fair that it was a wonder to see it all."
The admiral insisted that Cuba was a "peninsular" island depending from the mainland of China, and with stores running low he sent his public notary to gather testimony supporting this shaky claim that he was on the threshold of Cathay. Depositions were taken from the men in Columbus's entourage to the effect that Cuba was part of a mainland. All eighty were willing so to swear. Anyone who suggested the contrary could be fined ten thousand maravedis and the loss of his tongue.
The expedition left behind three colonies. Two soon disappeared by his brother Bartolomeo after the admiral's return to Spain in early 1496, enjoyed a fine harbor and flourished. The brothers named it Santo Domingo after their father, and by early in the next century the town could boast a cathedral and a university. Today, as capital of the Dominican Republic, the busy port has a population of nearly 1.5 million and is the oldest continuously inhabited European city in the Western Hemisphere.
But this second foray into the New World also left a less happy legacy. Spaniards forced the Indians to hunt for gold and to share their provisions and, when they failed to submit, exterminated them. In 1494 Columbus sent to Spain about five hundred captured members of the Taino tribe -- the same people of whom he had written "they show as much love as if they were giving their hearts." The three hundred who survived the passage were sold on the block in Seville. Here was the sorry inauguration of the slave trade between the Old World and the ENSLAVEMENT OF THE INDIANS?
Bartolome de Las Casas, an eminent Spanish bishop, used the accounts of his father and uncle, who had sailed with Columbus, to frame his luminous Apologia. He devoted himself to the denunciation of the plundering and devastation of the new territories with the "loss of so many thousands of souls." Appalled by Spanish cruelties, Las Casas passionately insisted that the peoples of the New World "are our brothers, redeemed by Christ's most precious blood, no less than the wisest and most learned men in the whole world." Through books, sermons, and direct representation to the crown, he pleaded the cause of the oppressed Indians for more than half a century. WHY DID COLUMBUS GO BACK A THIRD TIME?
No sooner had he returned from his second expedition than he petitioned the Spanish monarchs to finance yet a third. He insisted that he was certain to discover the mainland of Asia if allowed to press westward beyond the islands he had already discovered of where he had been would prove abundant in gold. After all, lands in the Indies located in the same latitude as those where the Portuguese had struck it rich in Africa (eight to ten degrees above the equator, in Sierra Leone) must be topographically equivalent in tropical heat, in gold, and in spices. This equivalency theory had been conceived by Aristotle in the fourth century B.C., and the Admiral of the Ocean Sea swallowed it whole.
King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella assented to a third voyage, yet it was some two years before written permission, money, and the requested fleet of eight ships became a reality. Wars with France and the kingdom of Naples were denuding Spanish coffers, and there were marriage alliances to negotiate that required staggering outlays. For example, no fewer than 130 vessels were assembled in an elaborately equipped flotilla to escort the king's daughter Joanna to Flanders for her marriage to the son of the Habsburg emperor. Columbus must have envied that fleet. But in the Iberian world. Vasco da Gama had just made it around the Cape of Good Hope to the real India in a stunning feat of navigation during the winter of 1497-98, and the Italian Giovanni Caboto was claiming islands off Nova Scotia for the English crown. Columbus's glory as an explorer was being eclipsed, and he knew it. ANY LUCK ON THE THIRD TIME OUT?
Almost none. Columbus touched on the mainland of South America, in what today is Venezuela, on August 4, 1498. He thus became the first European on record ever to set foot on a continent of the Western Hemisphere. He had mistaken the horizontal stretch of the peninsula for an island and turned north without trying to sail around it.
For Columbus this so-called island nonetheless represented an astounding discovery; he believed it to be the doorway to the Earthly Paradise often cited in the Bible, in tales of antiquity, and in the medieval literature he knew so well.
His initial landing on the discoveries of his third voyage. It had prompted the sensation that he was in this divine territory; the land and sea in this region appeared to swell in height somewhat "like a woman's breast," he observed. Pierre d'Ailly's Imago Mundi and Sir John Mandeville's Travels, two books that had stirred Columbus's imagination, claimed that the lands of the Earthly Paradise would swell almost to the height of the moon. Surely, then, Columbus was skirting the shores of Eden. If this was not Paradise, how could he account for the mysterious torrent of fresh waters -- actually issuing from the delta of the Orinoco River -- that mingled with the salt of the Ocean Sea? The Earthly Paradise was believed the locus of a great spring that flowed underground and resurfaced to become the four great rivers of the inhabited world: the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Ganges, and the Nile. The admiral would have little success in promoting this idea. Renaissance scholars were abandoning the fableladen geography reached a nadir when he was arrested on Hispaniola for mismanagement of colonial affairs, by an official sent over to the New World by King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. He was without question a poor administrator -- by turns weak, stubborn, and horrifyingly ruthless. Yet few could have satisfactorily handled the crises that were continually arising as part of Spain's conquest of the New World. There were rebellions and near rebellions among the hundreds of Spaniards cut off from their families and the comforts of their homeland, and the greed for gold drove them to break up into factions and to savagely abuse the natives. Columbus was returned to Spain in October 1500 in chains, along with his brothers, Bartolomeo and Diego, who had been given a large measure of authority in colonial affairs.
Thus the explorer's third search for the splendors of Cathay in the name of the Spanish monarchs met its ignominious end.
It was a voyage that, indeed, appeared to have been ill fated from the start. first and certainly little of the grandeur of the second. Columbus's insistence on the magical reality of the Earthly Paradise struck his contemporaries as little more than the imaginings of a man obsessed with the idea that he was an agent of divine providence. HOW DID COLUMBUS PERSUADE ANYONE TO LET HIM MAKE A FOURTH VOYAGE?
"In Spain they judge me," he complained, "as if I had been governor of Sicily or of a province or city under an established government, and where the laws can be observed without fear of chaos. This is most unjust. I should be judged as a captain sent from Spain to the Indies to conquer a numerous and warlike people."
Eventually the admiral was vindicated by the Spanish court, but the psychological damage to the infirm and aging man was profound. Now, more than ever, he wanted to seize those elusive riches, and this time he insisted that the wealth lay beyond a strait that led directly to the Indian Ocean. He in coming, and humiliating when it arrived. The admiral would be accompanied by an official comptroller who was to keep a strict inventory of the gold, silver, pearls, and spicery that Columbus had long dangled before the imagination of the Spanish court, and the explorer would be under the jurisdiction of a Spanish governor whom the king and queen had appointed to replace him in the New World.
Thus began a gloomy voyage in a modest fleet of four caravels. He sailed past islands already discovered but found no strait. He believed -- correctly -- that he was on an isthmus between the waters but had neither the men nor the supplies to push through the jungles that separated him from becoming the discoverer of the Pacific.
His ships began to disintegrate. Two had to be abandoned. The admiral was frequently delirious, his men explosively dissatisfied. "What with the heat and dampness," wrote Columbus's fourteen-year-old son, Ferdinand, "our ship biscuit had become so wormy that, God to eat the porridge made of it, that they might not see the maggots."
In the holds of his rotting vessels, captive natives committed suicide by hanging themselves from the low beams overhead, bending their knees in the cramped space to assure their death.
So ended the final voyage of Christopher Columbus. WHAT SORT OF MAN WAS HE?
It would be foolish to conjure up Columbus as a dashing, brilliant seaman or even as a bold and enlightened explorer. He certainly was a great sailor, and his successful crossing of the Ocean Sea was an unparalleled feat of navigation. Yet very little comes through from the scant information we have on Columbus the man, or from his own writings, to suggest that he was the swashbuckling, decisive, and gallant Renaissance figure often portrayed in schoolbooks.
He was, rather, contained, inflexible, and high-minded. He was also capable of ruthlessness and extreme cruelty. That he was imaginative and intrepid there can be no doubt. we do gain the sense of a magnetic personality: he was able to wed a woman who was by far his social superior, and he won the compassionate support of Queen Isabella for an enterprise that was decidedly risky. Like all those held up to heroic stature, he had that admirable mix of courage, single-mindedness, and zeal that saw him through overwhelming obstacles.
But if there was a single key to his character, it was his intense religiosity. Columbus had a fundamental belief in the Bible and a sense of destiny that was clearly messianic.
When he invoked mystical cosmology, the Bible, ancient legends, and empirical fact to authenticate his ideas, he gave no more weight to science than to prophecy. "God made me the messenger of the new heaven and the new earth of which he spoke in the Apocalypse of St. John... and he showed me the spot where to find it," he wrote, after having taken his little fleet across a forbidding sea us understand the Genoese explorer as a figure in transition from the medieval world, with its roots in the real and the unreal, to that of the boldly questioning Renaissance. WHAT DID HIS WORLD MAKE OF WHAT HE FOUND?
The voyages of discovery by Columbus and his followers provoked predictable excitement, yet for decades there was little understanding of the magnitude of what had transpired. Renaissance Europe had been guided by maps on which North America and South America were nonexistent; they did not suddenly jump into place. Scholars, merchants, and ecclesiastics found it inconceivable that the small islands first sighted by Columbus were not disconnected, negligible interruptions on the way to the Orient but part of a new land mass. Geographers worried that the astonishing disclosure of an undetected hemisphere would discredit traditional cosmography, built as it was on the precepts of classical antiquity and closely tied to biblical beliefs. That general bafflement prevailed is evident in the prelude to Sir Thomas More's Utopia, in which the author remarks with a palpable were never mentioned in the old geography books. "The process by which the Old World adjusted was slow, erratic, and frequently brutal. Acquisitiveness was stirred by the apparent sudden availability of silver and gold and the possibilities for territorial expansion; further, the New World's populations were viewed as the opportunity for mass conversions to Christianity. There was as much caution as curiosity, but the desire to know and the desire to convert were passionate forces in the Renaissance, and they ensured that the ultimate response of Christendom to what was once the dark side of the earth would be vigorous and decisive. Indeed, Europe could accept the New World only by imposing its dominion over it.
PHOTO (COLOR): Of the many sixteenth-century portraits of Columbus, this one has an unusually strong claim on authenticity; it is said to have been commissioned by a contemporary, a cleric who was assembling a gallery of portraits of famous men.
MAP: A 1520s Venetian map of Columbus's discoveries -- -- reflects the explorer's convictions: Europe is at the right, the Caribbean territories in between, and Asia at the left.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): No contemporary drawings survive of Columbus's 1492 fleet, but a sixteenth-century Flemish engraver thought its ships would have looked like this caravel. The navigator is trying to take a longitudinal bearing -- a task that in fact proved impossible until the development of the marine chronometer in the late eighteenth century.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): The earliest known European portrayal of New World inhabitants, this German woodcut from about 1505 shows "People of the Islands Recently Discovered" in a variety of situations ranging from the benign to the lurid. Hearsay accounts had them practicing cannibalism and making public love; the printmaker got it all in.
PHOTO (COLOR): King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella bid Columbus farewell in the operatic vision of his departure that the great Flemish printmaker Theodore de Bry executed a century after the event. In fact the port of Palos de la Frontera to see him off.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Columbus complained to his journal that the sea was often too rough to allow dependable celestial sightings for navigation. In this sixteenth-century print, a mariner has taken advantage of dry land to determine his latitude with telescope and plumb line.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): When in 1507 the cartographer Martin Waldsemuller set about making this map of the discoveries of Columbus and his followers, he portrayed most of them as one continuous strip of land -- and christened it America in honor of Amerigo Vespucci, whose portrait he included. Columbus couldn't complain; he had died a year earlier.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Among the thousand things that followed in Columbus's wake was the appearance of syphilis in Europe. Here, a Renaissance physician treats a patient with a New World remedy: a formula concocted from a special wood that is shaved and then brewed over a fire. The painting brought on the affliction.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): One of the two woodcuts in the first illustrated edition of Columbus's letter describing his voyage, published in Basel in 1493, showed La Navidad, the first European colony in the New World. The printmaker has given the colonists amenities they would have loved: solid, tidy buildings and tile roofs.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Naked inhabitants of the New World flee the two Europeans who are making their way shoreward in this the other woodcut in the 1493 Basel edition of Columbus's letter. One of the earliest scenes heralding the explorer's achievement, it depicts the Santa Maria as a forty-oared galley, a common vessel of the day.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Another of de Bry's spirited prints shows the nadir of Columbus's New World career: his arrest on Hispaniola following charges of having conducted a corrupt colonial administration. Francisco de Bobadilla, the emissary of the Spanish court, orders Columbus's his brothers to the ships waiting to carry them back to Spain in disgrace.
PHOTO (COLOR): Columbus and Vespucci share the honors in a triumphant allegory issued around 1580, when it had become clear that nothing would ever be the same again. Beneath them, Old and New World face each other, while European cities ring the foreground, Genoa in the center. "Who is able," demands the title (not shown), "to fashion a song worthy of the majesty of these events and discoveries?"
by Gloria Deak

Gloria Deak, a freelance writer, is the author of Picturing America, Princeton University Press, 1988.
Section: COUP DOCUMENT
I first learned about the coup against Mikhail Gorbachev around midnight, Sunday, August 18. My wife and I had just finished watching the Mel Gibson version of Hamlet on videotape, and had CNN on in the background while we rewound the tape. With the image of the body-strewn Danish court still fresh in our minds, we were startled to hear that an equally dramatic upheaval had just taken place in the Kremlin.
I knew that a hardline takeover in Moscow posed a direct threat to the pro-independence Latvian government in Riga. After confirming the seriousness of the developments with Paul Goble, Baltic Desk Officer for the State Department, I jumped in my car and headed for the Legation of Latvia in northwest Washington to see if I could establish contact with Riga.
Even under the best of conditions, phone communications with Latvia have always been difficult, and as I expected, all international lines to Riga were busy. The Latvian Foreign Ministry had recently acquired a cellular phone which could be reached by direct-dialing a Stockholm area code, our most reliable form of communication with Riga had been by telex, and by 4:30 a.m. -- I had sent a series of telexes to the Foreign Ministry, the parliament press center, the daily newspaper Diena, and the Latvian news agency LETA. I informed them that I was at the Legation ready to receive and distribute any news they had on developments. I received my first response about one hour later, at 5:36 a.m.
I spent the next three days and nights at the Legation, logging in telex messages, faxing out reports to the State Department and the press, and telexing reports of reactions in the West back to my contacts in Riga. By the second day of the coup, after TV, radio, and telephone lines had been cut in Riga, the only way to get news into or out of Latvia was by telex. Soon the Latvian government telex machines began shutting down one by one, yet the messages kept coming, as enterprising staffers at the Foreign Ministry the city.
All the details of what took place in Riga during the Kremlin coup still need to be sorted out, but the telex messages that streamed into the Latvian Legation in Washington during those three days tell a dramatic story in themselves. They were written by courageous people under great stress, in a city under siege. With each report of another Black Beret (OMON) attack on a government building, the circle grew tighter around my correspondents in Riga. For me, the most difficult part of the three days was waiting for the next telex. Because I knew that if it didn't come, my contacts, friends I had known and worked with for many years, had joined the list of victims. Thankfully, that was one report I never had to receive.
Following, in chronological order, are translations of the telex messages that the Latvian Legation received from Riga during that period. Each new message begins with the time it was received in Washington. Senders have been manner: TABLE Monday, August 19,1991 05:36 EST: For the time being all is calm in Riga. According to latest reports the commander of the Liepaja Garrison has seized the executive council of the city of Liepaja. Republic of Latvia President Anatolijs Gorbunovs went on radio at 11:00 urging the people to maintain calm and not to obey any orders given by illegally formed ruling structures. An emergency meeting of the Latvian government has been scheduled for 16:00, where they may adopt an appeal to world governments. FM 05:42 EST: An emergency parliamentary session will begin at 12:00. There are unconfirmed reports of armored vehicles in Riga. The situation is generally still calm. As soon as we have new information we will send it without delay. Thank you for your support. Diena 08:22 EST: "... If outside forces attempt to interfere and grant power to any illegal formation, the Republic of Latvia Supreme Council and Council of Ministers invites residents of Latvia to uphold peace and social order, not to cooperate and demand that the legal power structures -- municipal deputy councils -- be renewed. The only legal source of power is the people of Latvia." excerpt from announcement by President Gorbunovs and Prime Minister Ivars CodmanislLETA 11:38 EST: Supreme Council press release no. 2 (excerpt): "The Liepaja Army Garrison Commander, First Rank Captain Stalev, informed Andrijs Jaunsteins, deputy chairman of the Liepaja City Council, that in accordance with orders issued by Baltic War Fleet Admiral Ivanov, that he, Stalev, has been appointed Liepaja War Commander. Power in the city is being taken by a committee composed of military and civilian representatives .... Stalev requested that the city council cease, for one week, mass media activity."
Press Release No. 68 (excerpt): "Baltic Military District Commander Fyodor Kuzmin has informed Mr. Gorbunovs that he has been appointed as the main person in this area to execute directives of the state of emergency committee. If there is forceful resistance, then he will use all necessary means No. 3 (excerpt): "... Alfreds Rubiks, first sec. of the Communist party of Latvia, announced at a press conference that he is following current developments with joy and pride .... Rubiks suggests that the declaration of a state of emergency could lead to the introduction of martial law .... Rubiks says Mr. Ivans, the Republic of Latvia Supreme Council vice chairman, will have to answer for all he has said and done about the Communist party. During a state of emergency, all forms of meetings and demonstrations are banned. Today, Latvia's Communist party will meet. He says that a state of emergency committee will be formed quickly." LETA 12:21 EST: There are reports that OMON has taken the television building. Latvian radio is still broadcasting. FM 14:00 EST: OMON has taken the interior ministry. FM 14:12 EST: The telephone central has been taken. FM 14:29 EST: The residents of Zakusala have begun building barricades. Riga Radio has asked that no similar actions be broadcasting throughout the Latgale region. FM 14:47 EST: Latvian Radio reports that the Latvian Supreme Council has received news that the Russian Parliament is continuing its work. Part of the army has come over to Yeltsin. Yeltsin has designated a commander, thus Russia now has its own army. Yeltsin has given an order to provide weapons to those deputies working in the parliament. FM 15:58 EST: Latvian Radio has reported that a column of tanks and armored cars is moving toward Riga from Adazi. FM 16:0X EST: The Council of Ministers security HQ has been taken on Sporta Street. Fifteen armored cars are moving down from Freedom Blvd., ten more on Lubana Street with one squad of troops. Near the Riga train station a microbus has been fired upon with machine guns, killing the driver. There are injured. We've just learned it was a Writers' Association microbus. FM 17:07 EST: Writers' Association employee Raimonds Salmins has been shot to death and his passenger, Janis Verpahovskis, has been has been taken. FM 19:52 EST: Supreme Council Press Release No. 15 (excerpt): "The Republic of Latvia TV building was overtaken. It was reported that paratroopers entered the television complex by knocking out windows. At this time, no information is known about persons in the building. Latvian TV is not broadcasting at this time." LETA 20:01 EST: The army has taken the radio relay centers. Radio is broadcasting only via the Riga Broadcast Network. FM 22:04 EST: Latvian radio has been taken. There are troops and armored vehicles in the Dom Square. There was shooting. FM 22:05 EST: At 4:55 in the morning military forces occupied Riga radio studio and the telephone and telegraph central. No further information is available at this time. LETA 22:26 EST: As a result of military action the middle-wavelength radio broadcasting station stopped its work. LETA Tuesday, August 20 04:09 EST: The parliament and government are working. We are cut off from phone contact. Telex is still Supreme Council deputy Aivars Berkis were injured during the takeover of the radio. The city is quiet. Armored vehicles are only on the bridges. Supply trucks are not being allowed out of the city. The foreign minister will try to fly to Copenhagen. FM 05:45 EST: At this time our office has resumed work again. We will stay in our places as long as we can. We can only send and receive news by telex. Taken so far: Popular Front HQ (people beaten with rifle butts), radio broadcast station in Ulbroka, police academy, interior ministry, TV tower, radio house in Vecmilgrava and in Dom Square, telephone and telegraph central. Two deaths .... two injured .... at this time two heavily armored helicopters are circling over Riga's old town. The newspaper will continue to come out. Waiting for news from you. Please confirm receipt of this telex. TV has begun broadcasting again, only the Moscow station. Forgive us for being so chaotic. Please confirm Front faction of the parliament has unanimously called for a general strike tomorrow at 6:00 a.m. if the occupation of buildings doesn't end. All local government bodies will be sent a non-violent self-defense plan. If something happens to the parliament the government will be decentralized. Baltic Military District Commander Kuzmin has taken a wait-and-see position. In talks with Latvian government officials, he said that he is only following orders and is not a member of the emergency committee. Diena 10:33 EST: Latvian Republic Foreign Ministry Announcement: "The attempted military coup of August 19, 1991 by Soviet Bolshevik military powers is in reality open aggression against the Latvian Republic and the other Baltic states. In Riga, the interior ministry has been taken by force, all communications have been blocked and television and radio centers have been occupied. The Latvian Republic and its governing bodies have been effectively shut off from the rest of the world. The process of isolating and destroying the governmental institutions of the Republic of Latvia is continuing. At this moment pleads for diplomatic, political, and economic measures to stop the Soviet military actions in the Baltic, to restore all normal functions of the government of the Republic of Latvia, and respect the Latvian people's stated desire to regain independence." FM 12:26 EST: Three are dead, two or more are injured, but not seriously. This is since yesterday. The Supreme Council has not been taken, but rumors are spreading .... We will keep sending, for we don't know when we'll get cut off from the outside world. Ojars, if you can, please answer as soon as you receive this telex. We are eagerly awaiting news from you. Will stop sending after this message and wait for a telex from you. Ojars, you are presently the only one receiving information about events in Latvia. Please distribute it to everyone you can. Foreign Minister Jurkans departed for Copenhagen. Riga is suspiciously quiet. Please answer immediately so that we know you received this. See you later and press conference, no need to send that. We know as much about Moscow and Leningrad as you do for there is no phone contact. We are listening to RFE/VOA Radio Free Europe/Voice of America since Riga Radio is off. The newspaper Diena is publishing and is widely distributed. The Popular Front is meeting at the parliament and adopted a resolution that a demonstration will take place. Armored cars on the bridges have been replaced by tanks and paratroopers have been replaced by infantry. We can't give any more details. FM 13:44 EST: The OMON bandits have just grabbed the headquarters of the volunteer security guards arid a car with three people. Their whereabouts is presently unknown. We observed separate groups of 3-5 armored vehicles in Riga and Jurmala. Please try to inform the foreign minister in Copenhagen. FM 13:52 EST: Tonight at 20:00 the police academy training camp in Jurmala-Kauguri was taken by five armored vehicles without gunfire. FM 14:33 EST: Just walked around the Riga Center. Many people out in OMON is working together with the army. OMON men are walking around in army buildings in the city center. Five armored cars led by an OMON car entered Riga coming from Jurmala. There was a Soviet Latvian flag on the first armored car. A Soviet flag has been raised on the Soviet Latvian procurator's building. The Interior Ministry looks abandoned. The entrance doors are wide open. The Latvian procurator staff abandoned it at noon. We don't know how long the telex will continue operating. FM 17:10 EST: We have no further information about the situation. Armored cars are moving near the parliament and Council of Ministers buildings, but nothing indicates anything out of the ordinary. long pause in' message Just received fresh news. OMON has attacked the Council of Ministers building. We are evacuating the Foreign Ministry, for Radio Liberty just announced that the Foreign Ministry will be taken next. FM 17:12 EST: Nothing new is presently happening, although in the last hour there have been rumors that call and was told that at this moment they are taking the Council of Ministers building. We don't know what else has happened. The rumors were that at midnight they would take the Supreme Council. That has not been done yet. That's all for now. Diena 17:28 EST: At 22:00 two armored cars arrived at the Council of Ministers building. Security guards were ordered, in Kuzmin's name, to give up their weapons. Prime Minister Godmanis agreed. All his personal security has been arrested. The army is in the building right now. The Council of Ministers has been taken. Diena 17:42 EST: The Council of Ministers rejected Kuzmin's order. All are still in their places. Not too long ago Kuzmin called Godmanis several times and warned him that 'unnecessary weapons' would be taken from the Council of Ministers' security personnel. The army arrived in two armored cars. There was a calm discussion between the guards and Godmanis security aide Andrijs Bunka. Five or six has left. Godmanis has spoken to some Baltic military district general. The talks reportedly were calm, but we have no details. If we can, we will send additional news. LETA 18:03 EST: The Supreme Council press center reports that the Baltic military district command insists that those who took the weapons from the Council of Ministers building were OMON troops in army uniforms. Therefore General Kuzmin sent General Dudkin to the Council of Ministers to apologize. After that the disarmed Council of Ministers security personnel returned with Godmanis's aide Bunka. LETA 21:24 EST: At 02:00 Republic of Latvia Prime Minister 1. Godmanis spoke on Latvia's Independent Radio, which is heard throughout Latvia. Prime Minister Godmanis assured the people of Latvia that the Republic of Latvia Council of Ministers is still in power and in control of the current situation. Information broadcast by BBC and other international news agencies stating that the Republic of Latvia government has fallen is false. PM Godmanis said that he is in the building of the Council of to the Republic of Latvia. LETA/PAR 22:48 EST: The Popular Front of Latvia's appeal to the people of Latvia: "As a result of a decree by the Supreme Council and Council of Ministers, a general strike has begun in Latvia. Realizing the importance of this moment to the fate of Latvia, the Council of the Popular Front turns to the people of Latvia. Today all residents of Latvia must decide to oppose the occupation regime or bow their backs before their oppressors. Each Latvian patriot must join the general strike in his place of work, wherever possible. Protest meetings must be held at each location, and pickets at the gates of each establishment. Avoid provocations or conflict with military personnel. The threat of violence or repression must stimulate activity; those responsible for operating high-technology equipment can stay' sick' at home. Our struggle is just. And we will win. Our unity and loyalty will be demonstrated on August 23 in the flaming Baltic way." LETA Wednesday, August works. It's a private business that hasn't been disconnected. This is the only way we can maintain contact. Today tanks approached the Supreme Council building and 10-15 OMON soldiers released tear gas and appeared to be ready to seize the building, but then retreated. I don't know what will happen next. People are on strike, but it's hard to tell how many. The Supreme Council has adopted and released a new declaration of independence, without a transition period. OMON was there to try to prevent this. Our telex operator will sit and wait for news from you. I hope this doesn't get cut off. Please call my mother and tell her I won't be home on August 23. I just can't leave. Tell her not to worry, I hope she'll understand. We will immediately send you the independence declaration. FM 14:58 EST: On August 21 at 19:30 acting Interior Minister Peteris Jakimovs spoke by phone to USSR Interior Minister First Deputy B. Gromov to their base. Jakimovs informed Colonel Goncharenko, coordinator of Latvian and Lithuanian OMON units. In the discussion the thought was raised that they may disobey orders. During a Popular Front meeting, Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia D. Ivans reported that in talks with the command of the Baltic Military District, there was an agreement that the army will begin moving out of all occupied buildings. Tonight they have already begun leaving the radio building .... Two armored vehicles and a car with paratroopers have left the area around the TV building. The Latvian flag was immediately raised near the building. Armored cars and troops have also left the TV tower. Some of the troops said that they had previously been stationed in Germany. At 18:30 phone service has been resumed. Excuse all the typos and errors and confusion, we are extremely excited, but this time out of joy .... Diena 16:10 EST: The situation in Riga is becoming normal. The paratroopers have left all occupied buildings: radio has been removed from Riga. Latvia TV and Radio are working again. The Foreign Ministry will begin working again at 7:00 GMT. We will all be in our places. Thank Lalvia's charge d'affaires in Washington Dr. Dinbergs for the congratulatory note on our declaration of independence. FM 16:45 EST:... The Soviet army has now left the TV and radio buildings, inter-city telephone and telex communication has resumed. Latvian TV is broadcasting and the program "Panorama" and Russian language news has begun. Also the damaged communication lines at the radio house have been repaired and the transmission network is operating again. In a radio interview, Deputy
Talavis Jundzis said that the offices of the Radio House have been vandalized, it is totally chaotic -- broken doors, personal items stolen. But the army did not totally destroy the technical equipment in the studios. Clearly that was being preserved for the new landlords. We will send more. LETA
17:12 EST: Soviet military to withdraw. Dainis Ivans of Latvia, met today with Colonel General Fyodor Kuzmin, Baltic military district commander. Mr.Ivans presented General Kuzmin with the Republic of Latvia's constitutional law on the Republic of Latvia's status as a state, as well as other documents adopted by the Supreme Council of the Republic of Latvia. Mr. Ivans evaluated the situation as a failed coup attempt and requested that the supreme council be informed of the Baltic Military District commander's position. Colonel General Kuzmin stated that he had a similar conversation with Lithuanian President V. Landsbergis, that the military will be with drawn from Riga tonight...
ILLUSTRATION
By Ojars Kalnins

Ojars Kainins is public affairs liaison at the Embassy of Latvia in Washington, D.C

Costly to Consumers
Much has been done, in Congress and at federal regulatory agencies, to "civilize" the automobile; by making it less polluting, more efficient, and more safe. These improvements, however, have not come without costs to consumers. In the following article, Dr. Lave examines the drawbacks of making the automobile more socially responsible. A version of this article was presented at a recent Consumers' Research symposium on "Science and Regulation." (See "Science Behind Recent Regulations Questioned," CR, July 1991.) -Ed.
We can't live with cars and we can't live without them. Automobiles consume almost half the petroleum used in the United States. They are responsible for more than 40,000 deaths each year, 3 million injuries, and billions of dollars in property damage. They are the largest source of air pollution in cities and send millions of Americans into speechless rage every day in traffic jams.
At the same time automobiles provide unmatched freedom and mobility. They provide a major foundation for American and suburbs stems from the availability of cars. In many places it is impossible to shop for groceries, see a movie, or visit a physician without a car. As a result, society is reluctant, almost unwilling, to take away the driver's license of people who are not suitable drivers, such as alcoholics, those who regularly have crashes, or those who have lost their mental or physical abilities to drive safely. In America, getting a driver's license is the real symbol of coming of age.
Cars are used to flaunt wealth and live out fantasies. People buying cars with price tags exceeding $30,000 are not just buying transportation. Someone buying a sports car designed for operation above 100 miles an hour, with a price tag in excess of $100,000, is acting out a fantasy-and presumably planning to drive vastly in excess of the speed limit on a regular basis.
When our elected representatives or regulatory agencies turn their attention to automobiles, they find it difficult to separate society "Externalities"
Automobiles have undesired effects on people other than their occupants. In deciding which car to buy and how to operate it, each driver is making decisions that affect the safety and environment of other people and the operations of other cars.
There is no direct market mechanism to provide incentives for individuals to make decisions that are in the public interest, rather than in their more narrow private interest. In cases where externalities are important, some social or government action is needed to allocate resources efficiently.
The largest externalities of the automobile are: (1) highway congestion, (2) injuries from crashes, and (3) emissions causing air pollution. Other important externalities are noise, water pollution due to people dumping used motor oil down the drain, leaky underground storage tanks, abandoned cars, etc.; they are less important than the big three.
Some other undesired side effects of cars receive more public attention. For example, transportation uses about 60% of the petroleum vast majority. However, the price of gasoline covers most of the effects of petroleum use. Land use and life style are other central issues. The vast proportion of land in the city center is devoted to streets or parking lots (sometimes streets act as both). Highway noise, air pollution, and danger make living in the city center undesirable; many people have moved to the suburbs. This use of land may be an important social issue, but there isn't an important technical issue here and I can safely leave this one for bold politicians.
In the table on page 16 are my estimates of the social costs of the three largest sources of automobile externalities. Somewhat surprisingly, highway congestion is the most important externality, costing drivers and passengers more than $60 billion per year. I estimate that more than 40 million hours are lost each day in traffic jams throughout the United States-more than 10 billion hours per year. A very conservative estimate of the cost of delay is $6 per is a better estimate, the cost of congestion is more than $100 billion per year.
The next most important externality is highway crashes, costing about $50 billion per year. The 45,000 highway deaths, 3 million injuries, and extensive property damage exact a large toll. These costs are the sum of medical care expenditures and time lost from work. The pain and suffering associated with injury and the grief of family and friends could make this figure considerably higher.
The third externality, air pollution from automobiles, may seem surprisingly small, considering the amount of public attention it receives. Air pollution from automobiles is estimated to cost society about $10 billion per year. This low cost is due in large part to the fact that pollution emissions from new cars have been reduced by 95% or more under the Clean Air Act. Social Conflict
As responsible citizens, the vast majority of Americans recognize these three problems and understand that some sort of social or government action is needed to alleviate them. People that, as advised by bumper stickers, many of them "honk for eliminating traffic jams." Nearly all of us have a friend who was killed or severely injured in a highway crash. Almost 2% of us will die in a highway crash and many of us will be injured enough to require medical care. Most of us have experienced the unpleasant levels of smog that impair visibility, can make breathing difficult, and can cause eye irritation. These problems are apparent and many of us tell our representatives to solve them.
We also ask our representatives to enhance fuel efficiency so that the United States will not import so much oil. We want drunk and dangerous drivers off the road and many of us want the traffic laws enforced and want cars to be built so that they can be recycled.
However, we wear a different hat when we go to dealers and look at new cars. As car buyers, we want style, performance, luxury, comfort, and reliability. Some insist on a safe car.
Unfortunately, we have quite different things on our minds when we talk with our representatives than when we shop for a new car. A "sensible" car that got fuel economy, was safe, had low emissions, and low operating costs would not compete well with the luxury or muscle cars. While sensible, it would be more expensive than the economy cars. The higher price tag would mean that some people could no longer afford the car. Insisting on safety and other socially desirable characteristics has the effect of denying cars to would-be purchasers with the lowest income.
Even high-income purchasers suffer "sticker shock" due in part to the price increases stemming from safety, fuel economy, and emissions regulations. Although people want cars to be safer, many object to wearing their seat belts. Thus, there is a dissonance between our actions as citizens and our actions as car buyers and drivers. Fuel Efficiency Regulation
More stringent "corporate average fuel economy" attention. Since the most economical cars currently being sold get more than 50 miles per gallon (mpg), there is no question that better fuel economy is technically feasible. Whether it is desirable is more complicated.
Greater fuel efficiency would lower petroleum use, and thus lower petroleum imports. This would make us less dependent on OPEC, would lower world oil prices, and would also lead to less domestic oil use, preserving our reserves. Better fuel economy would lead to less air pollution. For some people, more fuel-efficient cars represent an improvement in life style; these cars would be less wasteful. Since stringent CAFE standards would increase the price of new cars, it would lead to fewer cars being sold and perhaps to less congestion.
Unfortunately, better fuel economy is not an unalloyed good. Getting better fuel economy from a car of the same size and performance requires substituting lighter, more expensive materials-e.g., plastics or aluminum for steel-or using a more expensive engine. Thus, to improve performance, cost and price will increase. Alternatively, the car can be made smaller or horsepower (and performance) reduced. Even if the price is not increased, a smaller, lower performance car is less desirable, and thus worth less to buyers.
In addition, a lighter car is inherently less safe in a crash. This is particularly true if the car is smaller as well as lighter, but it is still true if the car is the same size, but lighter. Thus, increasing fuel efficiency has both benefits and costs. Pushing the fuel economy of new cars from 27.5 mpg to 32, 40, or 80 mpg is not necessarily desirable socially. Some careful calculations are needed of the social benefits and social costs for each mile per gallon increase in fuel efficiency.
Without higher fuel prices, requiring Detroit to produce 40 mpg cars can not work. At current fuel prices, consumers want cars to average 27.5 mpg or less. If Detroit offered more fuel-efficient cars that most buyers would prefer current models. That is precisely what happened in the mid 1980s to General Motors and Ford. Both offered a mix of models that they thought would allow them to achieve a fleet average of 27.5 mpg, the government standard. However, consumers wanted to purchase many more of the large, less fuel-efficient cars than auto makers had planned. People were acting differently when they wore their car buyer hat than when they wore their voter hat. The result was that both auto makers could not meet the standard. One Cadillac and Two Geos
Suppose that the government insisted that auto makers meet the standard, even if people wanted the large cars and didn't want the small ones. Assume that the government requires General Motors to have its new cars average 40 mpg-or they can't sell cars. Now assume that someone goes into a Cadillac dealer and wants to buy a $30,000 car that gets 20 mpg. The dealer would have to refuse to sell the car, but might offer the cars: One Cadillac and two Geos (each costing $12,000 and getting 50 mpg). The three cars together average 40 mpg.
The purchaser might scratch his head: "I don't want to buy two Geos."
"Fine," says the dealer, "I will resell them for you. But I can't get anyone to buy them at $12,000. The best price I can get is $8,000. Thus, the package of three cars will cost you $54,000, but I will refund you $16,000 for reselling the two Geos."
The purchaser responds: "Wait a minute! That means the Cadillac is costing me $38,000, not the sticker price of $30,000. I want to buy the car at the sticker price."
"I would like to sell you the Cadillac at the sticker price, but the government won't let me. The public elected Congressmen who insist that the average new car must get 40 mpg. So the only way I can situation is fanciful. But, if the government insists that the average car sold by General Motors (or any other car company) gets 40 mpg while consumers want to buy cars averaging 25 mpg, there is a contradiction. The contradiction could be resolved by General Motors' adding a "gas guzzler" premium to its large, relatively inefficient cars and subsidizing the price of its extremely efficient cars. The premium and subsidy would have to convince General Motors' customers to buy a mix of cars that meets the standard.
There are two additional problems with attempting to compel fuel efficiency increases without increasing the price of gasoline. The first is that cheap gasoline would lead people to drive more than they would with expensive gasoline. For example, someone with a recreational vehicle isn't likely to drive as many miles at $2 per gallon as at $1 per gallon. Thus, the effect of cheap gasoline is to induce people to drive more, using more gasoline.
The second difficulty is that the to trade in their old cars. Since these older vehicles tend to get poor fuel economy and have much higher emissions than new cars, regulations that make new cars more expensive can be counterproductive.
Insisting on fuel economy standards without increasing the price of gasoline is a recipe for trouble. It would decrease the number of new cars sold, leading to greater emissions. Keeping old cars in service and keeping gasoline prices low would increase fuel use so that the result might be little or no decrease in petroleum use. If government mandates higher fuel economy standards, the new standards must be accompanied by gasoline taxes that would raise the price enough to induce consumers to desire, or at least accept, the fuel-efficient cars. Emission Standards
In the mid 1960s, automobile emissions were the largest source of unburned hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen, leading to high levels of smog. The 1991 car models have reduced their emissions of these pollutants by 95%. If old cars met the same emissions oxidants. Only recently have regulators started to focus on sources of unburned hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides other than cars. They still have much more stringent regulations for cars than for other sources.
California has been regulating automobile emissions since before the federal government started; they continue to have the power to set different standards, as long as their standards are more stringent. Recently, a number of states have begun to consider whether to adopt the more stringent-and expensive-California standards. Doing so would not be in the public interest for two reasons.
The first is that tightening new car emissions standards would have only a tiny effect on automobile emissions. Many of the cars on the road were built to satisfy less stringent standards when new. If they could be replaced by cars built to satisfy current standards, then emissions levels would fall. More importantly, emissions increase with the age of a vehicle. Old vehicles-or newer vehicles that are gross polluters-can emit more than 100 times the level of pollution per mile driven. of total emissions. Obviously, the air would become much cleaner if the older vehicles could be retired and if the gross polluters were required to comply. But the more stringent standards increase the price of new cars, inducing people to keep the old cars in service longer. Having "good" new cars can lead to better air quality than insisting on "excellent" new cars.
The second reason is that new cars are a minor source of air pollution compared with stationary sources and gross polluters. It makes no sense to single out new cars for stringent regulation. Congress and state legislatures seem to be locked into the idea that, since automobile emissions regulation accomplished a great deal in the past, the more stringent standards could accomplish much more in the future. They are deluding themselves. The air would get cleaned up much more quickly and cheaply by focusing on old cars and stationary sources. Regulatory Contradictions
Congress enacted legislation in 1965 requiring that cars be made safer; they passed legislation in law in 1975 requiring that cars become more fuel efficient. Although they didn't realize it, these three laws are in conflict.
Making cars safer requires adding safety features that add weight, which decreases fuel economy. Emission control features have tended to add weight and decrease combustion temperature, lowering fuel efficiency. The fuel efficiency standards have decreased the weight and size of cars, making them less safe.
All three laws have increased the cost of manufacturing a car and tended to reduce comfort, performance, and other attributes that consumers desire. The result has been that fewer new cars are sold and used cars are kept longer. Running used cars for a longer time has increased the number of less-safe, more-polluting, and less fuel-efficient cars on the road. Conclusion
The automobile generates huge benefits and huge costs for the United States. Regulation has improved safety performance, although at the cost of more expensive automobiles and intruding on personal behavior (buckling seat belts). Regulation has succeeded in vastly environmental consequences. Little has been done to alleviate congestion, despite the large improvements that could be had.
Congress has gotten enthusiastic about mandating fuel efficiency increases. Unfortunately, greater fuel efficiency has large costs in the form of more highway deaths and injuries. A careful analysis is needed as to how much additional fuel efficiency is desired.
If Congress doesn't raise petroleum taxes as it regulates fuel efficiency, other petroleum users will continue their profligate use. More importantly, without gasoline price increases, fuel savings will be reduced by the inducement to drive more miles and to keep old cars in service longer.
Tightening emissions standards for new cars is much less cost-effective than reducing emissions from gross polluters and stationary sources. Congress and the legislatures have to get out of the habit of thumping on this drum in order to achieve cleaner air.
In regulating the automobile, Congress and the regulatory agencies need to be reminded of the inherent contradictions between safety, emissions, fuel economy, and the price is more difficult than Congress thinks.
By Dr. Lester B. Lave

Dr. Lave is a professor of economics and engineering at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Penn.
SOCIAL COSTS OF AUTOMOBILES TABLE
SOURCES: A Report to Congress, Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control, 1989; Krupnick, Alan J. and Paul R. Portney,' Controlling Urban Air Pollution: A Benefit-Cost Assessment,' Science, 252:523-528, 1991.
WANT MORE EFFICIENCY? RAISE FUEL PRICES
The current focus on improving the fuel efficiency of cars makes no sense. Petroleum is also used by commercial and private aircraft, by power boats, recreational vehicles, and petrochemical products. If society is determined to reduce petroleum consumption, in addition to increasing automobile efficiency we could ban foam plastic cups and synthetic fabrics; we could require that commercial and private aircraft meet fuel efficiency standards. We could ban power boats or restrict the allowable horsepower. We could require recreational vehicles to meet the same fuel efficiency standards as cars. up nylon or campers. People who like to water ski or who own large power boats aren't eager to agree to restrict boat engines to a single horsepower. Yet it makes no sense to press hard on fuel efficiency for automobiles while neglecting other ways to save petroleum.
Congressmen may think they understand the issues and can prescribe the fuel efficiency of new vehicles. I doubt any member of Congress would like to set efficiency standards for power boats, recreational vehicles, commercial aircraft, private aircraft, petrochemicals, and other petroleum uses. Nor are the regulatory agencies anxious-or able-to set such standards for all petroleum uses.
One way to send consistent signals across the economy is to increase the price of petroleum. At $40 per barrel, airlines, power boat users, and purchasing managers would receive a uniform signal about how much petroleum to use. At some higher price, most purchasing managers would decide to switch from foam cups to paper cups. At a high price for jet fuel, airlines would As happened in the 1970s, car buyers would see the additional fuel costs and many would decide on more fuel-efficient cars. In short, a higher price for petroleum sends a uniform signal to conserve petroleum. Putting a large tax on petroleum not only motivates car buyers to purchase fuel efficient cars, it also motivates airlines, powerboat users, and cup purchasers.
By Lester B. Lave
Nothing has ever come easily to Pilgrim Pride founder Bo Pilgrim, which is probably why he keeps outsmarting his rivals.
WHEN Lonnie Alfred (Bo) Pilgrim was a young boy and wanted a Coke, his father, who ran the general store in the northeast Texas hamlet of Pine, would first make him sell six Cokes for a nickel apiece to the men working the nearby cotton gin. In 1939, when Bo was 11, his father died suddenly of a heart attack, leaving a widow, seven children and a deeply indebted store. Bo went to work as a farmhand. He later peddled newspapers, raised chickens and hogs, hauled gravel, picked peas and cotton and sacked groceries -- all before he turned 18.
Today Bo Pilgrim is a wealthy man. The company he started and runs, Pittsburg, Tex. -based Pilgrim's Pride Corp., is the country's fifth-largest chicken processor. His 74% of the $661 million (fiscal 1989 revenues) company is worth $130 million. More satisfying, he's found a way to take, Tyson Foods, and outsmart it.
In 1986 Pilgrim's Pride was enjoying its best year to date: It earned $19 million on $375 million in sales. But Pilgrim knew the prosperity would be transitory, because the company was almost entirely dependent on highly cyclical commodity chicken sales. Twice over the years, commodity chicken downcycles had almost bankrupted Pilgrim's Pride.
To insulate his company from those cycles, Pilgrim decided in 1986 to plow his surging earnings into the prepared chicken market. Prepared chicken is closer to a finished, ready-to-eat product. It is sold to supermarkets and to food service customers -- wholesale distributors like Sysco and Kraft General Foods (which resell it to restaurants, hospitals and the like) and fast-food chains. Unlike commodity chicken, prepared chicken sells mostly on a cost-plus basis.
To get into prepared chicken, Pilgrim had to ruffle the feathers of the industry's biggest producers: Tyson Foods and ConAgra. Both have retail products. But having spent $25 million on a but to take on both companies in both the food service and retail markets at once, and get volume up fast. "I never envisioned how difficult it would be," he says in a twang that reflects a lifetime in rural Texas. "It was like getting on the wrong ski lift. You might wish you hadn't done it, but there's no other way to get back down."
At first, to get food service business, Pilgrim had to price his products below Tyson's -- at a loss to Pilgrim's Pride. And in retail it typically takes years to break even on a new product. Pilgrim was spending $6 million to $8 million a year on advertising, promotion and supermarket slotting allowances, but couldn't get enough sales volume to cover those costs.
But then nothing in Bo Pilgrim's life has been easy. Pilgrim's Pride lost about $50 million over three years trying to crack the prepared chicken market, in fiscal 1988 (ending Oct. $506 million in sales. Disgruntled investors dumped the stock; the value of Bo Pilgrim's stake shrank by 76%, to $61 million.
Pilgrim finally turned the comer with a strategic retreat from the supermarkets and a major advance into the food service market. Retail products now account for a mere 2% of Pilgrim's Pride's prepared chicken sales. But in food service he positioned the company as an alternate to Tyson, aimed at those customers leery of being too dependent on one supplier. "A lot of buyers gave us information to help us duplicate the products they were buying from Tyson," Pilgrim says. With customers such as Kraft General Foods, Wendy's and Kentucky Fried Chicken, the company has been able to raise its prices to be in line with Tyson's.
John Bierbusse, an analyst at A.G. Edwards who keeps his eye on Pilgrim's Pride, reckons the firm will earn around $23 million, $1 a share, this year. Around 20% of Pilgrim's Pride's prepared chicken. Pilgrim says he hopes to get the figure up to 50% eventually.
Like Perdue Farms' Frank Perdue, Bo Pilgrim is working at becoming Pilgrim's Pride's best booster. He's a folksy presence in TV ads, wearing a business suit and a black, buckled pilgrim's hat atop his silver-white hair. Last year his promotional efforts very nearly got Pilgrim into some serious trouble. Hoping to influence workers' compensation legislation, Pilgrim buttonholed eight lawmakers on the Texas senate floor, argued his case and handed each a $10,000 check as a "campaign contribution." (Texas has no limit on personal campaign contributions.) After a public outcry, Pilgrim asked the senators to return the checks; he had to defend himself before a Travis County grand jury but was never indicted. He later called the incident "a bonehead mistake."
At 62, with his company humming along, Pilgrim still works 12-hour days, taking time out for a daily exercise regimen of treadmill work ago), thrice-weekly Baptist meetings and occasional yard work. His only real indulgence, hesays, is "my wife's dream house," to be built at a cost of about $2 million.
"People retire too early," says Pilgrim. "They should retire when they don't enjoy working anymore. I won't retire." Having started so young, for Pilgrim hard work is a well-ingrained habit.
PHOTO (COLOR): Preparing chicken parts at Pilgrim's $25 million Pittsburg, Tex. plant Ruffling the feathers of the big producers, Tyson and ConAgra.
PHOTO (COLOR): Lonnie Alfred (Bo) Pilgrim with his chicken and the hat he wears in Pilgrim's Pride commercials "A lot of buyers gave us information to help us duplicate the products that were buying from Tyson."
By Toni Mack
It took a transplanted Californian to teach Hawaii's businessmen to dress like they're in Hawaii.
MIDDAY ON Bishop Street in downtown Honolulu. Businessmen, bankers and lawyers rush between lunch meetings and appointments. But to an out-of-towner something seems strangely amiss. There's hardly a suit and tie in sight.
Chalk up the casual look among local influentials to Hawaii's temperate climate and a transplanted Californian named Reyn McCullough. The preferred attire: dress slacks and a muted print Hawaiian' shirt. More precisely, a short-sleeved pullover with button-down collar made by a family-run outfit named Reyn Spooner-Inc.
Such has not always been the case. Twenty-some years ago, when Jack Lord and Hawaii Five-O were in their heyday, many respectable Hawaiian businessmen still dressed in the staid old business attire of the mainland. And loud Hawaiian shirts, known locally as aloha shirts, were strictly for tourists.
But around that time the Hawaii state legislature created something called Aloha Friday, encouraging men to wear aloha shirts to work on Fridays. (Today's aloha shirt brightly colored print shirts were regularly made out of leftover material from women's muumuus.) Trouble was, most of the aloha shirts on the market were more suited to the beach than the office.
That's where Reyn McCullough comes in. In the 1940s and 1950s McCullough, who died seven years ago, owned a traditional men's store on Catalina Island off the coast of Los Angeles. My father got tired of watching the Pacific-bound planes fly overhead," recalls Reyn's son Timothy, 42, who now runs the business. So he decided to get on one and come out to see what was going on in Hawaii. '
He liked what he saw. Statehood was imminent. And so was the introduction of jet travel. Hawaii -- soon to be just a short flight from the West Coast -- seemed to be filled with opportunities. So in 1959 McCullough packed up his wife and two kids and moved, opening up a men's shop at the new Ala Moana shopping. No one, it seemed, was making an aloha shirt dignified enough for his local customers to wear on a casual evening out. So McCullough got it into his head to design a sort of preppy all-cotton aloha shirt with button-down collar. To make the shirts, he teamed up with Ruth Spooner, a custom swimwear maker in Waikiki.
The shirts, which he began selling in his store in 1961, quickly caught on with local customers. Not the least of their appeal was their toned-down colors. McCullough had observed that the most authentic-looking aloha shirts were the ones the surfers wore, which had become bleached out by the sun. To achieve that effect he simply turned the brightly colored floral and calico prints inside out.
Gradually, as the aloha shirt phenomenon caught on among businessmen, sales of Reyn (pronounced ren) Spooner shirts began to grow. By the mid-Seventies -- McCullough had bought Ruth Spooner's company in 1963 -- he was operating seven Reyn's stores and wholesaling shirts to mainland. Revenues for the company, which is headquartered in Waimea on the Big Island' of Hawaii, hit $2.5 million.
But by 1984, when Tim McCullough took over after the sudden death of his father, Reyn Spooner shirts were starting to look a bit old-fashioned. The younger McCullough moved carefully, but decisively, to expand the business. (One sister works as a buyer for the stores; two others are not involved in the business, and Tim's wife, Kooksie, oversees the women's merchandise.)
It's a delicate dance," says Tim, to retain the virtues of a company that was created by someone else and to move forward at the same time. He had worked around his father since he was a kid, beginning with odd jobs in the Catalina store. After high school, he spent eight years operating a truck farm before coming back to the family business. He recognized the company's greatest strength was the traditional look of its he also knew that the company was ignoring the more trend-conscious part of its customer base.
To attract new customers, Tim started looking at new fabrics and styles. (Reyn Spooner shirts come in five basic styles and cost between $52 and $70 each.) For starters, he expanded the number of patterns introduced every year -- ranging from florals featuring large plumeria blossoms to pastel prints of postcard scenes of Waikiki, circa 1940 -- from 12 to 75.
He also took the button-down coat-front model, among others, and updated it in Reyn-lon,' a 100% rayon fabric. The material is looser, drapes well, and looks better with linen slacks and pleated pants. Explains McCullough: This gives us entree to another kind of retailer that didn't buy Reyn Spooner before. We figure we can take an old Reyn Spooner customer and trade him up to this new look. '
Since taking over, Tim McCullough has more than doubled revenues, to nearly $16 million. To do so won't say how much. However, he says pretax profit margins have remained steady at about 10%. Most of the company's growth has come from expansion of the retail stores and a tenfold increase in wholesale accounts -- mainly specialty shops in Hawaii, Japan and the U.S. mainland. In addition to the wholesale business, which accounts for 50% of sales, McCullough runs ten Reyn's retail stores in Hawaii.
While Reyn Spooner's fabrics are made in the Far East, McCullough continues to make his shirts in Hawaii, at a 29,000-square-foot factory near downtown Honolulu, which employs almost 100 seamstresses. Why not lower costs by moving production offshore? For one thing, he believes an authentic aloha shirt ought to be made in Hawaii. Moreover, he adds, My goals are the same as my father's. Our business isn't about cheap. It's about quality. '
Aloha Airlines Chief Executive Maurice Myers, who has a closetful of Reyn shirts, agrees: The only problem with '
PHOTO: Reyn Spooner's Tim McCullough and wife, Kooksie. Our business isn't about cheap. It's about quality. '
PHOTO: Reyn Spooner's Honolulu factory. Authentic aloha shirts made in Hawaii.
By Ellen Paris
Section: ON THE HOME FRONT
Dateline: WASHINGTON, D.C.
-- On an easy Friday afternoon in late July, a group of senior Administration aides was sitting in the White House Mess having lunch when the word filtered through: Justice William J. Brennan was resigning from the Supreme Court. The reaction at the table was virtually uniform. "Oh, s --," said one.
In a few hours these same men would go into high gear, so that by Monday morning George Bush could announce that his choice to replace Brennan was David Souter, whose approval seems all but, certain and who will probably turn out to be the strict constructionist the President says he is, with the potential to shift the High Court decisively to the right. But the episode in the Mess was revealing. Instinct told these people that this event was a predicament, not an opportunity.
Small in itself, the incident nonetheless illustrates the tremendous disparity between the Bush approach and that of his predecessor. Whereas the Reagan people arrived in Washington with a Bush people see themselves as professionals, managers unencumbered by ideology. Consequently, President Bush does not hit the rhetorical high notes that Reagan did (his "Read my lips" speech being the notable exception), which in turn means conservatives are reluctant to give him credit even when he does the right thing.
Not that all the differences between Reagan and Bush are to the Gipper's advantage. With a 70 per cent approval rating and 12 sustained vetoes, Bush enjoys broader support than Reagan ever did, and this extends to communities, such as blacks, where Reagan never could. This difference in approach also means that conservatives and Bushites often argue past each other: while the former see an Administration heading for the rocks -- at least before Saddam Hussein's Kuwaiti Anschluss -- the White House can point to record popularity, every veto upheld in Congress, and, now, a superb handling of the gravest foreign-policy challenge Bush has faced. The question is what this approval means, whether it can
"Reagan was successful because he was not a member of the governing establishment when he came into office, and he was not a member when he left office," says Minority Whip Newt Gingrich, whose just-released tax package was designed in part to get the President back on track. "George Bush is a member of that governing establishment, and his success will be to change that system. The next sixty days will be crucial in determining whether Bush will govern with the American people and coercing the Left or with the Left coercing the people."
Even conservatives acknowledge that Bush is more alert, more accessible, and more informed than Reagan ever was. Much as they hate the word, they concede too that the Bush Administration technically is more competent. Because this technical efficiency is not tied to any specific goal save that of staying in office, however, Bush has gained himself any number of temporary allies but very few disciples. This in turn means that on issues such as abortion than Reagan, not only does he get zero credit, he is denounced as an opportunist. Bipartisan Dangers
HIS COMMITMENT to the Bipartisan Presidency is an even more serious liability. Far from making things easier for him in Congress, Bush's outreach has only made him more subject to its whims. In a Wall Street Journal article this summer, Fred Barnes compared Bush's strategy to the Nixon approach of selective endorsement of the opposition's themes, arguing that the price of stealing some of the issues from the Democrats has been "a moderate-to-conservative President, but liberal government."
To be sure, Bush has curbed the Democrats' grosser excesses by using the veto to great effect, certainly to greater effect than Reagan, who huffed and puffed but usually signed in the end. Bush's 12 vetoes have been on issues ranging from visas for Chinese students, to Medicaid funding for abortion, to minimum-wage increases. But while Bush has won the pitched battles, the vetoes are a sign that Congress says that the most apt comparison is with Gerald Ford, a nice man who ended up forced to resort to the veto a record number of times. "Because congressional leaders didn't know where he would draw the line they were constantly probing and prodding until they found they'd crossed it," says Keene.
There are other indications of the degree to which the agenda is set by Congress. In the past 18 months, there have been bills on minimum wage, child care, disabled rights, civil rights, clean air, etc.; capital gains, a Bush priority, is not even on the docket. Further, the White House's courting of Democrats -- e.g., John Sununu's direct negotiations with Teddy Kennedy on civil-rights language -- rankles with Republican lawmakers on the Hill. It also spurs the Democrats to push for more than they ever would have dared with Reagan. "The Democrats are more militant when they negotiate these days," says one Senate staffer. "They know said his goal is to be kinder and gentler."
Because Reagan never played that game he was without that particular liability, and even when surrendering a lot of ground he never surrendered the argument. In fact, his rhetorical fidelity to his principles gave him more flexibility than Bush, because it allowed him to compromise while holding onto his base. It's hard to imagine, for example, Congress coming out to the right of Reagan on China, if only because he would intuitively have understood the need to have a few Chinese students over to the Rose Garden to show where his sympathies lay. On taxes, too, Reagan probably could have gotten away with Bush's infamous June 26 press release. Beltway wisdom attributes this to Reagan's acting ability, but Reagan was so popular precisely because, unlike virtually every other politician, he wasn't acting.
Reagan's willingness to sound the trumpet had its practical benefits within his Administration as well. Because there was clear direction that everyone understood (see "Dangerous Liaisons," p. 32) would have been strangled at birth. "We were able to eliminate a lot of decisions before they got to the President because we all knew what Reagan had come to Washington for," says Reagan's former domestic-policy advisor, Gary Bauer. "The sense I get from the Bush Administration is that nothing is ruled out, that it's just good government. The problem with that is that they don't live in a good-government town."
A closer look at that 70 per cent approval rating reveals some worrying soft spots. For one thing, the latest issue of The American Enterprise shows that before Iraq the numbers had started to drop sharply. In addition, a staggering 78 per cent of the American public has not much of an idea where Bush plans to lead the nation, suggesting that his approval is high but fuzzy. Another 60 per cent think things have gotten pretty seriously off on the wrong track; although they are inclined is not as sharp as ii once was. At a time when the division in the country between Us out here and Them in Washington is widening, that's a warning signal.
As this article goes to press the President will be addressing the nation before a Joint Session of Congress to discuss the situation in Iraq, the budget summit, and other problems (in his mind. To date he has handled the former brilliantly and has somewhat extricated himself from the blunders surrounding the latter, which is why the White House is not worried about alienating his conservative base. But the danger is there, for the smaller Bush's base is the more dependent he becomes on developments outside his control, whether they are in the Mid-east, the USSR, or Congress.
"Approval ratings are just that -- approval," says Gary Bauer. "They don't measure passion, and there's a big difference. Politicians tend to find that out the hard way."
ILLUSTRATION
By bureau chief.
Anti-Anti-Communists TABLE
JOHN Kenneth Galbraith has summed up the differences between capitalism and Communism with the line that capitalism features the exploitation of man by man, while under Communism the situation is just the reverse. This bit of cleverness has usually been employed on behalf of Galbraith's theory that the Soviet and American economic models were exhibiting increasing signs of convergence. But it was also meant to ridicule the cold war. Why, Galbraith seemed to suggest, should intelligent men waste their talents in an absurd conflict over competing economic systems, each with its obvious imperfections and inequities?
Is it churlish to remind the world of the infamous -- or, in Galbraith's case, silly -- opinions expressed by the democratic world's progressive intellectuals on the subject of Communism? Not really, given the role they will play in shaping the post-Communist foreign- policy debate. Galbraith, for example, having been wrong, wrong, and wrong again about the Soviet economy, is even today cautioning the Russians and others against putting too much faith in the market.
Galbraith intellectuals and foreign-policy specialists, as well as those of a more leftward bent. Mainly the critics of the cold war were concerned with Washington, not Moscow. The cold war, they claimed, did not entail a commitment to the spread of freedom, but rather signified, in the words of Ronald Steel, numerous interventions conducted in the tired vocabulary of anti-Communism,... the sacrifice of... unmet needs to an insatiable war machine, and... the deliberate deceit practiced by America's leaders. '
Written in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, Steel's words remind us that over the past twenty years victory over Communism did not figure prominently among the priorities of the intellectual elite. For in the ideal scenario, the final chapter of the superpower conflict was not to have brought unilateral Soviet surrender, but rather some sort of mutual accommodation which would leave both systems more or less intact. Thus where once it was smugly proclaimed that Mikhail Gorbachev's reform course had deprived seems that those encountering the most difficult adjustment to the cold war's winding down may be those who opposed the cold war all along.
The refrain of the late socialist leader Michael Harrington was: 'We are not naive about the Soviet Union.' In fact, a measure of willful naivete was necessary if one was actively to promote a policy of American global disengagement. For it was well understood that public support for detente would be forthcoming only if the Soviet Union was perceived as less brutal and less imperialistic than was actually the case. The Soviet leadership proved the biggest obstacle to this effort. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance's pronouncement that Presidents Carter and Brezhnev had similar dreams and aspirations' was repeatedly mocked by reports of poets being packed off to mental hospitals, the production of more and more accurate missiles, or the presence of Soviet tanks and advisors in some wretched Third World country.
The real crime of the apostles of disengagement was the unwillingness to engage in a reassessment of their world gains, and the retreat of democracy in the immediate post-Vietnam era. Indeed, Communist triumph provoked ever more tortured alibis for the Kremlin's internal totalitarianism and global aggression.
We were told that the sole purpose of Brezhnev's military buildup was to achieve parity with the U.S., an objective that was justified because Russia had so often been the victim of foreign invasion. In expanding its influence in the less developed countries, the USSR, it was said, was only doing what the U.S. had done in the past; as George Kennan observed, it was absurd to think that the Soviets could ignore the pleas of fraternal socialist regimes given their position as leader of the world Communist movement.
By the time the Red Army had rolled into Kabul and the Sandinistas had declared America the enemy of mankind,' a revised line of reasoning had to be elaborated. A few complained that the hostile U.S. stance was denying the USSR the world stature which was its right. Stephen F. Cohen, for example by which he meant a co-equal role for the Soviets in settling political problems all over the globe. Incredibly, there were those who contended that a policy of restraint was needed given the Kremlin's awesome military might and the prospect that conflict in some Third World outpost might escalate to full-scale atomic war -- a policy, in other words, of flat-out appeasement. High-Wire Act
HERE INDEED was a dizzying high-wire act. For it mattered hardly at all whether the advocates of disengagement saw the Soviet Union as ideologically relaxed and uninterested in expanding the empire, or as an increasingly unpredictable military juggernaut. The advice to the American government was always the same: Don't overreact.
Another obstacle faced by the anti-cold-war brigade was the utter failure of the Communist ideology to mellow. The appalling abuse of psychiatry revealed, or should have revealed, a quite stunning attitude of official contempt toward Western standards of humane behavior. George Kennan allowed as how under Stalin dissidents would have been shot, not merely given a prison Studies, was one among many who insisted that the Soviet people were more concerned with economic and social guarantees than with personal liberty.
Others cautioned against giving too much credence to the views of the dissidents. True, the Marchenkos, Bukovskys, and Solzhenitsyns were to be admired for their personal courage. But, after all, they were embittered individuals, prone to exaggeration about the level of popular discontent and overly hopeful about the prospects for Russian democracy. Stephen Cohen suggested that the dissidents were less in touch with the views of ordinary Russians than the local Party secretaries. Some were even harsher. Sovietologist Jerry Hough, whose reputation for eccentricity is often due to a willingness to say publicly what others assert sotto voce (he recently characterized Boris Yeltsin as a fascist), once stated that Soviet dissidents had no more influence on their society than Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman had on American society.
In fact, Russian intellectuals like Amalrik, Bukovsky, and Solzhenitsyn clearly understood something which eluded most Western could not be changed through incremental steps. The dissidents functioned as expert witnesses on behalf of the theory of Communism as a totalitarian system quite different in nature from traditional dictatorships like Chile's. Their testimony carried the power of personal experience, devastating in its unique insight into the psychological repercussions of life under state socialism. Not surprisingly, the dissident message was unwelcome to the proponents of detente. Yet rather than engaging in a frontal attack, they carried out a disgraceful rear-guard campaign designed to discredit the dissidents through accusations of incipient fascism, Russian chauvinism, or anti-Semitism.
One source of particular distress was the dissidents' assertion that socialism was in practice antithetical to human nature. The great leftist illusion, after all, was that socialism had never really been tried, that fledgling attempts to realize the socialist dream had been strangled by a combination of Stalinist brutality and American hegemonic bullying. Indeed, a few continued to find positive aspects in the Soviet experience. One year after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, brutality, has had some spectacular successes. "He cited the rapid modernization of Russia, the end of massive starvation in China, and Cuban literacy efforts as examples of what regimentation and the shake-up of an old corrupt order can do." "The Reverend William Sloane Coffin once described Communism as a page out of the Bible," and described as a real indictment of Christians' our failure to equal the achievements in social justice found in China and Vietnam.
Now that Communism has been swept aside, there will be a temptation to excuse the excuses as a kind of intellectual victimless crime. This would be a mistake, for the fudging, evasions, and downright duplicity contributed to the weakening of a number of important American institutions, and may even have played a role in extending the Soviet system's life.
The Democratic Party and, more generally, American politics, must be counted as among the chief casualties of anti-anti-Communism. It was, after all, leading members of man, who changed their minds and provided establishment credentials to the anti-cold-war stance hitherto limited to marginal intellectuals like Noam Chomsky. The party itself, from the precinct level up, fell victim to an isolationist virus which -- more than any other single factor, including race -- influenced the Democrats' decline as a national party. That the Democrats came to regard George McGovern as a respected elder statesman (the conscience' of the party) despite his apologetics for the Soviet subjugation of Eastern Europe, while treating Scoop Jackson as something of a menace for his anti-Soviet philosophy, indicates the depths of the party's retreat since John F. Kennedy's Bear any burden, pay any price. Unfortunately, the party's impulse in dealing with its waning fortunes has not been to undertake a thorough re-evaluation of its world view, but rather to attempt a series of public-relations maneuvers designed to camouflage the persisting sway of the mindset of disengagement.
Another institution to have suffered from the collapse of the cold war consensus is toward Communism involve questions of fundamental morality, there was the additional issue of the Communist persecution of Christians, both in Eastern Europe and in Third World countries which the mainline denominations looked on as paragons of social virtue. Yet as their co-religionists were being tormented, church leaders were busily meeting with compromised, regime-sanctioned church officials or formulating manifestos laying blame for the world's ills squarely at America's door. These actions did not go unnoticed by those who suffered under Communist oppression, and who now regard the American Protestant leadership with disdain.
Political-science scholarship suffered from its difficulty in regarding Communist societies as totalitarian. It is little wonder that Sovietologists failed to anticipate Communism's demise given their assumption that the Soviet Union and even the Eastern European regimes had achieved political stability and were developing social institutions which were increasingly resembling their counterparts in the democracies. The corruption of academic standards was notably pronounced in the study of Third World radical societies, which came to be dominated by ideologically engaged' scholars who saw totalitarian institutions as a stimulus to democratic participation. But Sovietology did not escape unscathed. Scholars who persisted in stressing the Communist use of terror or more subtle instruments of control were often looked on as cold-war relics; young scholars were more prone to examine Soviet day-care policies than the repression of religious believers.
Finally, there was serious damage done to the idea of integrity in political debate. It could at least be said that the early Western enthusiasts for Bolshevism did honestly believe in the utopian potential of Communism and were unaware of the criminal nature of the system.
The current generation, by contrast, can not claim ignorance of Stalin's murders. They knew the truth, and yet were willing to manipulate facts, contrive excuses, and even lie in order to move America toward a more reasonable' posture. Perhaps the most lamentable result was the serious internal division over the need to respond to Communist advances. As certain revolutionary leaders have testified, Communist gains in the Third World were directly influenced by a. Those who contributed to the country's self-doubt also contributed to the victory of Third World Stalinism -- systems whose major achievement was not development,' but killing, mass exile, poverty, and civil war.
As to the future, it is to be hoped that the more moderate critics of the cold war will again play a constructive part in the debate over America's role in the world. It must be noted that the predominance of anti-Yeltsin views suggests little cause for optimism.
Those of a more radical stripe will no doubt seek out new causes and new utopias. Environmentalism holds an obvious appeal for those drawn to utopias; the realization of the radical environmental agenda would entail a degree of totalitarian regimentation that would compare well with what went on in Hoxha's Albania. But a truly mass movement devoted to radical ecology is not likely to materialize. Environmental controls inevitably collide with the public's economic well-being, a fact which will always limit the movement's mass popularity.
For the its energies on the Balkanization of America along lines of race and gender. And, of course, the struggles for multiculturalism, political correctness, diversity, and the like carry the potential for doing further damage to some of America's key institutions -- its schools, its universities, and its once-great cities, not to mention the crucial, overriding idea of a common culture. For many, the war against the cold war was less about supporting Communism than about weakening America. We can soon expect the Left to bring that struggle back home.
By ARCH PUDDINGTON

Mr. Puddington works for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty in New York. He is the author of Failed Utopias, published by ICS Press.
Section: National Affairs Crisis in the Gulf The president transforms the plight of Iraq's hostages into a political issue
Some of them inhabit Baghdad's luxury hotels, where boredom and homesickness are the biggest threats to their well-being. Others hide in Kuwait, in constant terror of discovery by Iraqi troops, and get by on the kindness of Arab friends. Still others serve as "human shields" at Iraqi military bases and other potential targets, where living conditions range from the uncomfortable to the unspeakable. All of them, fugitives and prisoners alike, are the unwilling "guests" of Saddam Hussein. Last week the hostages, including nearly 1,000 U.S. citizens, began their fourth month of Babylonian captivity.
"I have had it with that kind of treatment of Americans," George Bush said on the campaign trail last Wednesday, abruptly transforming the plight of the hostages into a political issue. For three months his administration had taken pains not to get bogged down in a hostage crisis 20 times the size of the one that did in Jimmy Carter not shape U.S. policy, and most of the country approved. Then last week, with tensions rising in the Persian Gulf, with his political fortunes sagging and an election coming up, Bush suddenly started to denounce Iraq's abuse of the hostages.
"They have committed outrageous acts of barbarism," he charged at a rally in Mashpee, Mass. "Brutality -- I don't believe that Adolf Hitler ever participated in anything of that nature," he added, in a bit of verbal overkill. The president's rhetoric served several purposes. It put new pressure on Saddam Hussein, warning the Iraqi dictator that if he does not withdraw from Kuwait, Bush may use I force to drive him out. It alerted the American people that war may be necessary and attempted to drum up the anti-Saddam fervor that will be needed if the public is to support military action. And it distracted attention from Bush's budget debacle, helping to reverse his steep slide in the polls. In fact, presidential "by talking up the gulf crisis while campaigning for Republican candidates (page 30).
But his message was unclear, contradictory and sometimes shrill. After spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Bush was trying to "prepare the American people for any eventuality," the president himself declared: "I am not trying to sound the tocsin of war." Bush was at his most schizophrenic on the war-peace issue when he said in one breath: "I am not ruling out further options, and I am not trying to prepare our country for war." When he said he had "had it" with the way diplomats at the besieged U.S. Embassy in Kuwait City were "being starved by a brutal dictator," he was deflated by the ambassador's wife. Margie Howell, who talks to her husband, Nathaniel, by phone every day, said on NBC's "Today" show that embassy staffers "have an ample supply of stored water and canned food." With water from a, she said.
According to freed hostages and other sources, the prisoners are held under varying conditions, and there is no evidence that the Americans are treated consistently worse than other captives. The luckiest, as a group, are the businessmen, travelers and diplomats who were in Baghdad when Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2. Some, like a group of 200 Irish nurses, worked for the Iraqi government under contract. Most of them have been allowed to stay in hotels and apartments. They live in relative comfort, describing themselves as "swimming pool hostages" or "guestages." Some are I even free to leave Baghdad and travel around in what pop-music fans among them call "Jail house Iraq."
When they found out he was American, "the Iraqi people related in a friendly manner to me personally," says Peter Timko, a 23-year-old graduate student and State Department intern released two weeks ago. But even comfortable captivity has drawbacks. "The worst part of the whole says Lloyd Graham. a 48-year-old Houstonian who got out at the same time. Bertel Berg, a Swedish doctor who is still a "guest," says hotel prisoners increasingly suffer from "hostage fatigue," consisting of such stressrelated ailments as high blood pressure.
The fugitives in Kuwait are much worse off. One of them, a New England man whose family wishes to preserve his anonymity, wrote to his wife that Americans are "cowering here like hunted animals." in fear of being captured and sent "to poison-gas and munitions plant". in Iraq." He asked: "What are we to do'? The Voice of America is silent. The U.S. Embassy is silent. Hostage-taking will not determine B.S. foreign policy, but what of American foreign policy -- is it to free us or leave us to languish in this hell?"
Many of the fugitives survive on food and shelter provided by Kuwaiti friends. "I don't think American people understand how many Kuwaitis Beth Hanken, who returned home last September and whose Kuwaiti husband is still trapped in the emirate. One family of six, including two small children, was summarily executed when a foreign passport was found in their house. Last month the Iraqis chopped off a man's hand for daring to "feed the enemies of Baghdad"; then they shot him dead.
At least 105 Americans are being held as human shields, according to the State Department. Many of them are badly treated. "I have been in the Iraqi gulag for almost two months," one hostage wrote in a letter released by the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. "Bars on windows. Doors locked. No telephone calls to anyone. You can survive. But one must be psychologically capable of being alone with oneself." Michel Munoz, a French technician released last week, was penned up only a few yards away from giant propane tanks at a petrochemical complex. "Eight of us had food poisoning, and they he recalled. Munoz said, 'People were becoming deeply depressed... You would see the sun rise and think, Another day with the propane'."
Paul Merlet, a French doctor, and his wife, Monique, were held at an arms factory west of Baghdad, where one of the other hostages was Richard Sementelli, an electronics consultant from Newton, Mass. He was seized in Kuwait and spent two days in a transit camp where 40 people were crammed into a room barely big enough for all of them to lie down at the same time. Sementelli recalled that Iraqi guards threw rice onto the floor; the prisoners "ate like animals," said Paul Merlet. More comfortable quarters were provided at the arms plant, but then the hostages were moved into small, windowless offices -- "a rathole," Merlet said. They staged what the doctor describes as a "little rebellion," waving flags and protesting. Their rations were cut. "The Americans seem said Jean-Michel Leturcq, a French schoolteacher." They revolt a lot, and revolt helps you to keep things together in your head. "Leturcq said the Japanese hostages he had seen were not at all well. They don't revolt easily; they stay in their rooms," he said.
Iraq insists the hostages are treated well. "President Saddam Hussein has ordered that if war begins, the guests should get into the shelters first," said Information Minister Latif Jassim. "You know guests are very important to us." Saddam plays the hostage game shrewdly and ruthlessly. He parades some of them on television, last week showing them off in cozy surroundings. He doles out hostages a few at a time to visiting celebrities like Kurt Waldheim and Jesse Jackson. Four Americans, all with medical problems, were released last weekend, and this week former West German chancellor Willy Brandt is expected in Baghdad, where he may be rewarded with similar currency.
In an apparent all French hostages were sent home, except for a few who chose to stay behind. The speaker of Iraq's Parliament, Saadi Mahdi, hinted that more hostages would be released if other countries promised not to attack Iraq. And Baghdad said the "families of those who are staying as our guests in Iraq can come to visit them during their Christmas and New Year."
A few relatives said they would accept Saddam's offer; others defiantly rejected it. "I don't think he'll win the humanitarian of the year award for that," Bush said. The president planned some gestures of his own. He sent Secretary of State James Baker off to the Middle East and Europe to explore the possibilities for a negotiated settlement and to brace the allies for possible military action. The president planned his own trip for later this month; he will spend Thanksgiving Day with the troops in Saudi Arabia.
Some members of Congress were uncomfortable with the president's harsh language. At a, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, challenged Bush's assertion that hostage conditions had deteriorated markedly, noting that U.S. intelligence agencies hadn't informed him of any such change. "Wouldn't you call being away from your family a form of abuse?" asked Baker. "If that was the standard," Cohen shot back, "we would have gone to war against Lebanon years ago."
Democrats charged that Bush had turned jingoistic in order to stem Republican losses in tight congressional races. "If the president wants politics to end at the water's edge," said Democratic Rep. Dave Obey of Wisconsin, "he has an obligation to leave events beyond the water's edge out of campaign politics." But in the heat of the campaign, the hostages became the president's issue. By putting their plight into a political showcase, Bush took on the burden of solving the problem -- and became a hostage of sorts himself.
PHOTO (COLOR): A little): They have committed outrageous acts of barbarism': Flags wave on the campaign trail in Massachusetts
By RUSSELL WATSON with THOMAS M. DEFRANK on the campaign trail, ELEANOR CLIFT in Washington, RUTH MARSHALL in Paris MELinda LIU Baghdad, DEBRA ROSENBERG in Boston and bureau reports
TO WAR OR NOT TO WAR Aug. 2
War clouds gather. Iraq invades Kuwait, seizing oilfields and forcing the royal family into exile in Saudi Arabia. The West asks: do Iraqi ambitions stop there? Aug. 7
War fever rises: President Bush orders American military forces to Saudi Arabia to defend its oilfields. Aug. 10
Help arrives: 12 out of 20 Arab heads of state agree to send a Pan-Arab force to Saudi Arabia. Aug. 17
Iraq says it will hold Westerners at civil and military facilities as "human shields" against attack. Aug. 25
U.N. Security Council authorizes the use of force by Western navies to enforce sanctions. Aug. 28
Iraq orders all Western women and children hostages against Israel and Saudi Arabia "if the Iraqi people are being strangled" by economic sanctions. Sept. 24
A peace feeler: French President Francois Mitterrand offers a fourstage plan in search of a diplomatic solution to the gulf crisis. Oct. 16
Secretary of State James Baker says Iraq talks compromise: withdrawal from Kuwait in return for two islands in the Persian Gulf, as well as a disputed oilfield. Oct. 25
U.S Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney announces that as that as 100,000 more troops will be sent to Saudi Arabia. Nov. 2
Iraq sees "all-out war" if attacked: its toes will "curse their destiny." Notes from Underground The journal of a family with hostages in Kuwait
The invitation was for a visit in Kuwait -- then a dream vacation in Europe. When Donald Latham and his wife, Maria, issued it to his parents, Eugene and: Lucille Hughes of Albuquerque, NM., last summer, the gulf crisis was already simmering In the United States, the couple's daughters, asked them not to go. "Nothing can happen to us," they replied -- and set of: The day before they were to leave Kuwait, Saddam Hussein invaded the country -- and the four Americans went underground Lucille Hughes and Maria Latham got out, but the men are still hiding Since the day of the invasion, Velma Edson has been keeping a journal of her family's ordeal She en trusted it and some smuggled letters to NEWSWEEK'S Jeanne Gordon. Excerpts:
Thursday, Aug. 2, 1990. Little Mike Don's son received a call from Don saying Iraq had invaded Kuwait. Got home from work and NBC in Idaho asked me to come in to be interviewed. They also let me use their phone to try and call Kuwait. Spent all day at work dialing phone -- got through to Don at 3:00 p.m. our time. When I asked if everyone was OK, he said, "Yes..." Then the phone went dead another lady whose husband is in Kuwait. She is very upset. Her husband says there are many tanks on-shore in Kuwait and battleships in the water.
Sunday, Aug. 5. Went to church and when I got home, Sen. Steve Symms's office had called and said they were unable to Locate parents or Don and Maria. Said Mom and Dad were probably in good hands.
Tuesday, Aug. 7. The president has ordered troops into Saudi Arabia and Saddam Hussein says he will "pluck out the eye" of anyone who helps Arab nations defend themselves against him. Americans! are being taken to Baghdad. Rumor has it that they aren't hostages, but I think they are.
Friday, Aug. 10. Called Kuwaiti Task Force hotline. Warning Americans not to travel to Kuwait. Non-essential Embassy personnel and American citizens to depart immediately. Stay in touch with Embassy next to Hilton. Phone service deteriorating. Airport closed. Grocery stores still open. Some Americans able to purchase working.
Sunday, Aug. 26. People who escaped tell us they saw Mom and Dad several times. All major companies and shopping centers are burned and looted. Food is getting scarce.
Tuesday, Sept. 4. Sen. Symms's office told me Maria's name is on list of women and children who have applied for exit visas. Apparently Mom has decided to stay with Dad. Also, someone has placed Dad's name on a list of people with emergency medical conditions. He has a heart condition and is low on medication (probably out by now). This is the first time it has really hit me and I feel like crying.
Thursday, Sept. 6. Duffy Dixon of ABC in Idaho came out to work. She asked me what was my worst fear in this whole situation. I told her it was that I wouldn't see Mom and Dad again. I guess that is kind of selfish -- should have expressed concern over their future and safety -- but Sept. 7. Someone called and told me Mom was seen on TV getting off plane in Jordan. 15 minutes later my sister Ruth called and said she heard the same thing. I called State Dept. They confirmed that Mom and Maria were on the plane. Our prayers have been answered.
Sunday, Sept. 9. Everything's a blur. I'm in Albuquerque and Mom is free! Mom won't be here until Monday at 6:00. The government is dumping ex-hostages in Charleston and they have to get home however they can -- whether they have any: money or not. The governrnent will loan it but they sign their life away to do this: I don't think this is right.
Monday, Sept. 10. We decorated the yard with ribbons, rented a limousine to pick Mom up in: Albuquerque and a big party is planned.
Saturday, Sept. 28. Don and Dad called Mom and still sounded OK. Think it was a linkup on ham radio. Pete Domenici of Mexico: My son and I are hidding with two other Americans and one British subject. We are completely surrounded by Iraqi troops and haven't been out since the 18th of August. We:live in constant fear of discovery, and transport to a place of strategic v:alue.': The Kuwaiti resistance have made this letter possible. You can see the risk they willingly take to protect us. This death penalty is not a mere threat, and has been carried out several times. Saddam shows no interest in leaving Kuwait without use of force... We can only hope that the talking will stop and the action begin before my medical problem becomes critical, or we are captured.
Friday, Oct. 19, a tatter from Don: To All U.S. Agencies who will listen. The purpose of this letter is to draw attention to the plight of the hostages and of: the Kuwaiti people as well. As shaky as our own situation is, it doesn't hold a candle fed and protected us and all other foreigners under the threat of hanging. Five: members of one family were shot because the Iraqis found an: American passport in their home on a search. When are our troops going to intervene? Six thousand Kuwaiti youths have been taken to detention camps since Aug. 2 and are being subjected to torture from electricity, beatings, nails, hammers and the like. The Red Cross offices have been closed and its board members captured and subjected to brutal treatment, group torture assassination. All medical equipment from the hospitals has been taken to Baghdad. They are refusing aid to any person other than Iraqis or Palestinians. Saddam Hussein will not leave until he is forced. The sanctions sound good but we see little effect of them.
Saturday, Oct. 27. Called Mom in Albuquerque. She has a letter from Joe one of the men hiding with Eugene and Don. She says the letter is very strongly worded because he has no wife to shield from "shattering State Dept. from Embassy in Kuwait: "Dad and Don still OK and still in the same place... please reply." We've never had a request to reply before so we don't know what this means.
Sunday, Oct. 29. I got a message that the men hope to see us "after the dark moon of November." Mom says she has heard reference to this also but won't say from where. A lieutenant colonel at Ft. Bragg says to prepare ourselves mentally because something is going to happen in next two weeks. Of course we have heard this before, too! Mom called tonight. Apparently Don says he would give anything to see the light of day. They are getting angry and I hope my intuition is wrong but it sounds like they may be starting to panic. They have requested a gun.
Wednesday, Oct. 31, letters from Don for Maria and President Bush: Maria, I know these notes aren't much, but they getting out. We would give anything to be able to get out and take a walk or just breathe good fresh air. All of us are exibiting definite signs of cabin fever. We try to keep from getting bored. Wednesday is poker, Thursday is bridge. The news from the States is depressing. The Voice of America says 66 percent of people polled say they want a diplomatic rather than a military solution. In Britain 86 percent favor war. Somewhere along the line the U.S. has lost all its guts, and a good bit of its national soul. The Kuwaitis still hope for us to give them the help they need to stop the destruction of their country, but I can give no further assurances of help coming. I just won't lie to these people.
Dear Mr. President: I am hiding in the state of Kuwait to avoid becoming a Guest' of the Iraqi government. We need help, Mr. President. Have you ever been in the position of having to die? He will not allow us, at this time, to consider surrendering and being forced to Baghdad. He fears, and rightfully so, that we may be stuck there for years. All of us remember Teheran. At least in Kuwait we have a small chance. I'm sure that the sanctions will eventually work, but we do not have those months to wait. Please help if at all possible, while there is still a Kuwait left to send help to.
PHOTO (COLOR): Soldiers
PHOTO (COLOR): Mother and Child
PHOTO (COLOR): Saddam Hussein
PHOTOS (COLOR): The light of day: Eugene Hughes and Don Latham in a secret Kuwait location, Lucille Hughes on her return at the Albuquerque airport
Section: THE ARTS... is a Viking helmet, a ray-gun book, a Count Basie CD. Did I mention the bunny spoon?
B O O K S
No matter what the leading economic indicators indicate, this is still the season to be jolly: even if we have to lower our expectations, we can still lift our voices. In fact, a lot more joyful noise could be made if carolers could call to mind all the verses of, say, "O Little Town of Bethlehem," and once-a-year piano players knew just how the chords go when you come to "Yet in thy dark streets shineth." Of all the songbooks around to help, few are more useful or handsome than And the Angels Sing: A Song Book of Classic Christmas Carols (Rizzoli. $12.95) produced by Boston's Museum of Fine Arts. It's got words, simple piano arrangements, chord symbols for guitarists, and illustrations from medieval and Renaissance art works. Almost as wonderful is what it doesn't have: "Little Drummer Boy Chipmunks. Have yourself a tasteful little Christmas.
A mystery and a love story, Nick Bantock's unconventional novel Griffin &; Sabine (Chronicle. $16.95) is about a London postcard designer who corresponds with a female postage-stamp designer in the South Pacific. It's also about the illicit pleasure of reading other people's mail. Because both correspondents are artists, Bantock reproduces their lavish cards and letters, down to the envelopes and the handwritten letters tucked inside each page is as much fun to look at as it is to read.
Cole Porter, that most "elegant, sw'elegant" of songwriters, traveled in style. He stayed at the tres chic Palace Hotel in St. Moritz, lunched in Lisbon with the tres riches Gulbenkians, and cruised the Greek Islands on Niarchos's yacht. Movie actress turned photographer Jean Howard, who joined his entourage for two trips to Europe and the Near East in 1955 and 1956, tells how exciting-and exhausting -- a grand tour with Cole could be in a grand). And if you believe gentility is still viable in a Kitty Kelley world, A Cup of Tea (Simon &; Schuster. $15.95) is just your you-know-what. The richly bordered text mostly relates tea lore-guaranteed not to overstimulate-but it's sprinkled with recipes for scones, madeleines and Devon honey cake.
The Reader's Companion to American History edited by Eric Foner and John A. Garraty (Houghton Mifflin. $35) is a browser's paradise, with absorbing essays on Americana from birth control to fire departments to pop art to Orson Welles. Alabama photographer Charles Moore documented one of the most painful chapters of American history-the civil-rights movement. Powerful Days (Stewart Tabori &; Chang. $24.95) is powerful stuff. The freedom marchers look as heroic as Iwo Jima Marines fighting their way up a mountain-which is just about what they had to do.
If you're all for the environment but wish ecologists weren't so boringly virtuous, check The Earth First! Reader (Peregrine Smith. $14.95) which combines good science with seem tame by comparison, but Here Today: Portraits of Our Vanishing Species (Chronicle. $35) is a heartbreaker, with Avedon-style portraits: a North American river otter, a bright-eyed salt-water harvest mouse. Call us anthropocentric, but these creatures seem possessed of beauty, dignity, even wit.
You could be locked away for seeing dogs, snakes and dragons on your kitchen ceiling; step into the backyard and you're OK. If trying to pick out Canis Major, Hydra and Draco in the random stars is your idea of a good time, drop hints about Giuseppe Maria Sesti's The Glorious Constellations: History and Mythology (Abrams. $95), with 624 charts and pictures, and 48 color plates of a charmingly crude astronomical fresco in Italy's Villa Farnese. Sesti does not mention a fat guy with reindeer-perhaps because he only appears once a year.
Most Christmas lists have a case or two of arrested development: Leslie Singer's Zap! Ray Gun Classics (Chronicle. $12.95) 1939-just color photos of toy ray guns from the Buck Rogers XZ-38 Disintegrator Pistol (1936) to the Han Solo Laser Pistol (1978) and on into the '80s. Plus a few things boys didn't point at each other, like winged badges, and InterPlanet Space Money: "Be a Space Millionaire."
Marc Okkonen's Baseball Uniforms of the 20th Century (Sterling. $30) will be to the diamond's fashionmongers what Bill James's books are to its nerds: the bible. Year-by-year spreads of home and away uniforms are prefaced by the sartorial histories of individual clubs. Suspicions confirmed: frequent and radical redesign (e.g., the Chicago White Sox) is characteristic of chronically bad teams; and baseball's front-office troglodytism is probably caused by overexposure to double knits.
Anyone reading this will probably be interested in The American Magazine (Abrams. $60), celebrating 250 years of a versatile, sometimes magnificent, medium. Lavishly produced, this reader's feast is also a thumbnail social's abolitionism to the rise of women's magazines to the golden age of The New Yorker. Any magazine of consequence (and some that aren't) receives at least brief mention.
In 1984, Harper's magazine Index, a page of pointedly selected stats. What Counts: The Complete Harper's Index (Henry Holt. $12.95) tells us that 26 brand-name products appear in "Back to the Future, Part II" and that 30,000 Americans hold Pan Am reservations for a trip to the moon-or did, before other airlines took over many of its routes. Is Delta ready for this?
From "dabble (to wash or rinse quickly)" right through to "hyuh" (i.e., "here") the Dictionary of American Regional English. Vol. 2, 0-H (Harvard/Belknap. $59.95) catalogs the crazy ways we talked before being masscommed into a nation of mushmouths. Well, not all of us. The Dictionary of Contemporary Slang (Pantheon. $15), a trove of unbecoming.
Remember what books were like before the cost-crunchers? The First Edition Library (1800-345-8112) offers replicas of American classics (Faulkner, Fitzgerald, Cather) as they first appeared. The latest is a handsome Huckleberry Finn ($34.95), with the original typeface, goldstamped cover and line drawings by E. W. Kemble. As Huck would say: downright sivilized.
Late in the 14th century, a French gentleman in his 5Os married a 15-year-old orphan and (in response to her pleading, he claims) wrote for her edification a volume of instructions on how to care for home and husband. A Medieval Home Companion (HarperCollins. $20) has lovely period woodcuts, and is full of thought-provoking tips: walk with your head down, speak as little as possible, emulate faithful dogs who think only of their masters, and if you are planning to carry around a live carp all day, wrap it in wet hay.
Big, glossy cookbooks are easy to give but pretty pointless to receive going to get stained and smeared and dogeared because it's used so often. Susan Herrmann Loomis's Farmhouse Cookbook (Workman. $14.95) is full of hearty dishes emphasizing fresh, country flavors, and she includes delightful essays on family farms across the United States. If you know kids whose idea of home baking is a microwaved brownie, rush over with My First Baking Book, by Helen Drew (Knopf $12), an excellent guide to cupcakes, peanut-butter cookies and other divine rights of childhood. F U N &; G A M E S
It had to happen: a compact-disc trivia game. The only surprise is that it's so much fun. With a dozen categories and close to 1,800 questions, Play It By Ear (Rykodisc. $40) can entertain almost anyone. Just choose a field, get a question card, pop the CD into your player, listen to the info/clue and holler out the answer. Best: the Short-Term Memory and Really Short Stories sections, which test attentiveness, to Juggle &; Other Matters of Life &; Death (1-800-FLY-9000, ext. 814. $19.95) has to be the most entertaining how-to video ever made. But anybody who's seen this zany foursome in person would expect nothing less. Their 35-minute video is a charmingly wacky tale of heaven and hell that manages to integrate juggling lessons into the plot. Tricks like the Wandering Odd Ball and the Three Ball Shower, for example, are taught by two devils on an HTV-ha, ha-program called "Juggling for Your Soul."
Remember the parody Swiss Amy knife that opened into a three-bedroom bungalow? Life imitates jokes: now the Eddie Bauer catalogue has one called the Hero ($99.95) whose 16 blades can pop a beer, carve "The Rubaiyat" on a pinhead and pirate the pay-per-view signal for Wrestlemania. Well, almost. Closed, it's big enough to serve as a chock for a parked DC-10.
If you long instead for gizmos from earlier times-say, the days of knights-then consult the catalogue), which has such swell accessories as jerkins, poison rings and "vessels for wine, mead or Druid's fluids." For only $28 you can throw down the gauntlet; for $255 you can wield a Norman sword; for $595 you can don a 50,000-link chain-mail shirt. But it's the helmets that make us swoon: IndoPersian (with a tube for feathers), Arthurian/Roman (flexible cheek plates) and our favorite, a Viking beauty with brass wings.
So you're not as gutsy as Amelia Earhart or Chuck Yeager. You can still be a fearless backyard pilot-and one-up them by building the craft yourself Design stores are stocking Whitewings kits (AG Industries, Inc. $17) with 15 sleek paper airplanes, old favorites or futuristic fantasies. The hefty manual has step-by-step instructions for assembly, aerodynamic tips and formulas for designing your own planes. Rubber band and catapult are included.
Who'd guess that the most fun in New York theater these days can be found not up on? In Song of Singapore, the hall has become Freddy's Song of Singapore Cafe circa 1941, from which the Malayan Melody Makers swing band and their amnesiac singer are trying to escape just as the Japanese are due to arrive. It's part campy mystery, part saucy revue, but the music is great and the banter between the band members is sharp. Tickets are $25 to 40. Show up early for preshow dancing, Freddy's blue-plate special and exotic drinks like the Taiwonon.
The Micro Zen Rock Garden may seem a sacrilege: a 6-by-10-inch "executive sandbox" replicating the 16th-century oasis at the Ryoanji temple in Kyoto. No matter. The kit (from Sarut, 800-345-6404) contains a wooden frame, white sand, a raking tool and six rocks. Pour in the sand and rake: this is the vast, eternal sea. Carefully place the rocks: these are the earth. Do it all "as slowly as possible." Even the price is calming: $23. Georgia O'Keeffe: The Now York Years (Knopf/Callaway. $100) and you would have a coffee table, not just a book for one. You'd also have the best of the series (which includes "A Hundred Flowers" and "Georgia O'Keeffe in the West") simply because it contains her best paintings, including the incredible "The Shelton with Sunspots" (1926). But an O'Keeffe book under the Kovacs lamp is like a ponytail on a bankruptcy lawyer: expected. For true cultural suavity, you have to turn to Richard Parks Bonington: On the Pleasures of Paintlng (Yale. $85). Bonington is one of those artists who get so overexposed in their time ("the most influential British artist of his era after Turner and Constable") they are doomed to be forgotten (he died at 26 in 1828, so we look at Delacroix instead). Now Bonington's getting hot again. The book is as solidly written as it is beautiful. It'll nourish you Homer, on the other hand, is a perennial. He never said much-to anyone, apparently-but he said a mouthful when he predicted (and we're paraphrasing a bit), "Forget the rest, I will be remembered for my watercolors." Exactly right. In Winslow Homer: Watemolors (Hugh Lauter Levin. $75), trees, boats, fishermen, women all look like trees and boats and so on, but they're also pure color, pure form, the perfect marriage of intention and execution.
Such formalist beauty in photography is always unexpected, because the artist can't make it. He has to find it. That's what Henri Cartier-Bresson does in America In Passing (Bullfinch. $75), a weirdly peaceful set of images from the especially unpeaceful years after World War II. Like a graceful cat, Cartier-Bresson pounces again and again on moments that should be about Something Important-angry protesters, political conventions-and unearths unexpected beauties in a wave of picket signs and the tidy hats of over the sublime, how about "adult" comic books? Adult implies the wrong thing, so let's just call' em weird. Selecting from this huge field requires an eagle's eye and a hyena's humor. The best drawing style is Drew Friedman's photo-pointillism in Worts and All (Penguin. $9.95). The stories ("I, Joey Heatherton" among them), however, are an acquired taste. By contrast, Ben Katchor's Cheap Novelties (Penguin. $12.95), featuring Jules Knipl, Real Estate Photographer, is almost whole-earth wholesome. The dumpy li'l guy with the pencil mustache just wanders lower Manhattan wishing for things like public mustard fountains. If you insist on titillation, try Hearts of Sand (Catalan. $13.95), a translated French comic-book "novel" that's a combination of "Casablanca" and "Blue Velvet." Shows what can happen when your libido and inkwell stay out in the desert sun too long.
None of this inspired cartoon from the nose-thumbing comic book your grandparents loved to hate (they couldn't figure out what "potrzebie" meant) to its current settled status as the Walter Cronkite of satirical magazines is chronicled in Maria Reidelbach's Completely Mad (Little, Brown. $39.95). The raw material is so good you almost hate to have it interrupted by historical analysis.
Although your local major museum does need the money, and while you might enjoy a gift-shop discount and a Chablis-'n' -pate preview of "Pewter Miniatures from Bavaria," expand your esthetic horizons with an alternative space annual membership instead. Places like Hallwalls in Buffalo, N.Y., Artists Space in Manhattan, The Mattress Factory in Pittsburgh, Randolph Street Gallery in Chicago, DiverseWorks in Houston, The Contemporary Arts Forum in Santa Barbara and The Capp Street Project in San Francisco are where the artists who drive Jesse Helms nuts get started. Arrive before the police do and see the work in real life, not just photocopied on a Rev. Donald Wildmon handout Philistines, art can convert the unbeliever, rally the troops... and win hands of poker. If you're holding bona fide Michelangelo playing cards, that is. The Deity's face backs one set, Adam's is on the other (Piatnik, 800-962-3468. $10 for a two-deck set). And of course art can be therapeutic. Help dear ones soothe inner beasts or at least unleash artistic potential: give them the irresistible Color Collection (Xonex, 216-442-1600. $20). Packed in a sleek black case are watercolors, oil pastels, magic markers, colored pencils and crayons (a dozen of each). And if these dear ones have land, give them a "palette" of the Flowers of Nonet (White Swan, 800-233- 7926. $30), color-coded containers of flower seeds that bloom in the hues of the master's garden at Giveny. Some of the 61 varieties are familiar, but when was the last time you planted Seine Valley poppies? D E S I G N
Forget stuff of the '80s; it's time for a down-to-earth Christmas. You can find lots of nifty, sleek small items in museum and design specialty shops. One of our favorites: a slim, black double-blade razor (Travelshave, 514-8665112. $8) that's only slightly larger than a Mont Blanc pen but holds enough shaving cream for 10 shaves in its handle. Or, if you insist on a little luxury, there's the spacious stainless-steel cocktail shaker by Milan-based designer Matteo Thun (WMF Hutschenreuther, 800-999-6347 $90). Its undulating bulges supposedly make it ergonomic, but it reminds us of some of the puffed-up guys in Men! (Chronicle. $8.95), a book of duotone postcards of he-men from the '20s. But we digress... Kids born with silver spoons in their mouths can really get a grip on Spoons to Brow With. The utensils won a prize from the Industrial Designers Society because the wide handle-in the shape of a bear, a bunny or a fish-is easy for little.
The same specialty shops are also troves of first-rate crafts. One-of-a-kind ceramic pieces like Anne Lloyd's blue-skies-and puffy-clouds Magritte vase (The Whitney Museum Shop, N Y C $240) waft right over the line from craft to art.
William Morris railed against the Victorian fondness for reproducing furnishings from past eras, yet here we are, more than 100 years later, eating up reproductions of the English designer's wallpapers and fabrics. But it figures: his richly colored patterns are nature-based. The man and his work are detailed in William Morris, Decor and Design by Elizabeth Wilhide (Abram. $45), and Arts and Crafts Carpets by Malcolm Haslam (Rizzoli. $65) celebrates the lush carpets of the international design movement Morris inspired. Vibrant replicas of the rugs are now in some major carpet stores ($2, 000 to $10, 000).
Talk about old-fashioned. When the snowy winds are howling, take a look at the sunny, neo-Victorian village detailed in Seaside, edited by David; paper $24.95). This is the first book devoted to the postmodern experimental community in the Florida panhandle, where the husband-and-wife planning team of Duany and Plater-Zyberk tested out its powerful-and simple-ideas for alternatives to our suburban sprawl.
Speaking of armchair-traveling, The Splender of France: Chatsaux, Mansions, and Coon. try Houses (Rizzoli. $110) provides a breathtaking tour. The 330 color photos of picture-perfect exteriors and gardens, and exquisite gilded, frescoed and tapestry-filled interiors are dazzling. (Don't leave this on the seat of your Louis XVI fauteuil-it might not withstand the weight.) M U S I C
Let's face it: the true meaning of Christmas is lots and lots of crummy music, redeemed by traditional carols, Handel-and Phil Spector. And this year, by the Chieftains' The Bells of Dublin (RCA), with the Irish folk ensemble and guests: Elvis Costello, Jackson Browne, Marianne Faithful. This something-for-everyone disc will also keep peace in the house. Equally Celtic (Nimbus): the BBC Welsh Chorus sings such vernacular carols as the regal "Tua Bethlem Dref" and "Tawel Nos," a lovely variation on "Silent Night."
Most opera stars should resist the urge to record Christmas albums, but Christmas with Thomas Hampson (Teldec) is the best since Leontyne Price's '60s evergreen. Baritone Hampson serves up 21 songs, from "Adeste fideles" to "Go Tell it on the Mountain," with the richness and spice of a plum pudding. Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle embrace music that knows no season on Spirituals In Concert (Deutsche Grammophon) with infectious abandon: sorrow songs, foot-stompers and a wickedly dishy "Scandalize My Name." As the Welsh say, Haleliwia!
An opera about a woman who asks Herod for the head of John the Baptist may be a bit gory for the holiday season, but the new Salome, conducted by Giuseppe Sinopoli (2 CDs. Deutsche Grammophon), is the record of Studer sings with a rare and steely sensuousness; she has the power to drive through the orchestra and the flexibility to float over it. Judy Garland's legion of fans has remained loyal since her death in 1969, but Judy Garland: The One and Only (3 CDs. Capitol) may recruit new admirers. Her wit, intensity and clarity are all in full bloom in these recordings from the '50s and early' 60s. She was surely the last singer who could've gotten away with a serious torch rendition of "Why Was I Born?" Billie Holiday gave a new voice to American song, but her life finally undermined her voice. In The Legacy 1933-1958 (3 CDs. Columbia) -- Only two of the 70 tracks were cut after 1942-she's brave, breezy, knowingly innocent. In The Complete Dacca Recordings (2 CDs. GRP), from 1944 to 1950, she's still in good form, but Lady In Autumn: The Best of the Verve Years (only. The Patsy Cline Collection (4 CDs. MCA) has 104 cuts by the doomed diva of country. Not just "Crazy" and "Sweet Dreams," but "Crazy Dreams" and "Crazy Arms." Someone you know will be... wild about it.
"A Christmas Gift for You From Phil Spector," released in 1963, remains the one rock Christmas album worth hearing. The Ronettes' "I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus" will still shiver your tinsel. This and three more CDs of classic Spector productions return on Back to Mono (1958-1969) (4 CDs. ABKCO). Weird pop didn't die with Spector's three-minute wall-of-sound operettas: it went global. A Luaka Bop Compilation (Warner), a sampler from David Byrne's Luaka Bop label, offers the samba of Rio's Jorge Ben, the roof-blowing mambo of Havana's Conjunto Rumbarana-and Byrne's own hodgepodge of idioms. What distinguishes Luaka Bop from more sobersided world-beat labels is Byrne's the Kansas City original, but the Count's bands were always lean and mean. As sportscasters say, they came to play. In the late' 5Os and early' 60s, Basie was best heard live, and there was no available format expansive enough to capture his band stretching out. Until now. Live Roulette Recordings (8 CDs, 12 LPs. Mosaic. 203-3277111) is a mother lode of highenergy arrangements and great playing. It's also a triumph of packaging, by a strictly mailorder archival outfit that restores and reissues (and, in this case, unveils) out-of-print jazz and blues classics in the classiest manner possible.
Why another Annie Get Your Gun (Angel/EMI) when the original cast recording with the irreplaceable Ethel Merman is still around? To remind us how marvelous Irving Berlin's score is. Sweet-and-sassy Kim Criswell as Annie Oakley and Thomas Hampson as a creamy-voiced Frank Butler deliver firstrate performances. But suppose you'd forgotten Berlin wrote "You Can't Get a Man" or who sang it. Are your days too busy for rifling through a stack of books to learn who wrote, say, "Little Man, You've Had a Busy Day"? You need Lissauer's Encyclopedia of Popular Music In America: 1888 to the Present (Paragon. $135). Robert Lissauer covers everything from soul to rock to show tunes in a 1,687-page volume with 19,000 plus titles. (*Answer: Maurice Sigler, Al Hoffman and Mabel Wayne, 1934.) F I L M
The big news for film buffs (as opposed to movie fans) is the long-awaited video release of Marcel Carne's 1945 romantic epic Children of Paradise (Home Vision Cinema. $79.95) fully restored to 195 minutes, with newly translated subtitles. Starring Arletty and Jean-Louis Barrault, and set in Paris's theater world of the 1800s, the film was made under incredible hardships during the Nazi occupation. The all-time favorite of many, it's sometimes called "the French' Gone With the Wind Jean Cocteau's poetic version of Beauty and the Beast (Embassy Home Entertainment. $39.95) from 1946 with Jean Marais as the Beast. Then you'll be able to say smartly at cocktail parties, "Oh, you mean the Disney version."
Speaking of Disney, the good news is that Fantasia, the beloved animated celebration of classical music, will finally be available for holiday gift giving this year (Walt Disney Home Video. $24.99 for video alone, $99.99 for Deluxe Collector's package; also on laser disc). The bad news is that this will be the first and last time the original will be offered for home viewing. Furthermore, the next time the landmark feature is released theatrically, in 1996 or 1997, it will appear under the title "Fantasia Continued," with some of the eight original sequences replaced by new selections. NEWSWEEK to Disney: in our opinion, the apprentice sorcerer with the big ears has an ironclad no-cut contract.
If your kids can there's no reasons why you can't read about movies while you're watching them. Foreign Affairs: The National Society of Film Critics' Video Guide to Foreign Films (Mercury House. $14.95) might sound soporific, but it's actually a generous (568 pages) compilation of very readable reviews. Kael, Sarris, Denby, Ebert, Rafferty, Schickel and (ahem!) this magazine's film critic are all represented. They certainly remember when college kids in the 1960s flocked to revival houses to see old Humphrey Bogart flicks and went home to dorm rooms plastered with posters of the star who could dangle a ciggie from his lip like a bungee diver from a bridge. If you remember the revivals or if -- congratulations-you went to Bogie films when they were new, take a look at a lean, elegant new photo book, Humphrey Bogart: Take It &; Like It (Grove Weidenfeld. $30). Jonathan Coe offers a smooth essay to tie together the 150 lacquered pix. Who knew smooching giddy dames in Broadway shows?
PHOTOS: Leo, a' Glorious Constellation,' left; (clockwise from above) the Archangel Gabriel, a Charles Moore photo from 1965, a letter to Sabine, ray gun and a lineup of baseball socks (CHARLES MOORE, NICK BANTOCK)
PHOTOS Corn' from' Georgia O'Keeffe's New York Years' (left), mail-order arms and armor (above),' Texas, 1947' from America in Passing' (METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART; HENRY CARTIER-BRESSON)
Spoons baby can get a grip on (left), Seaside, the neo-Victorian experimental community on Florida's panhandle (top), Lloyd's finely handcrafted' cloud'vase (STEVEN BROOKE; MARRIA FERRARI)
PHOTOS: The Chieftains, masters of Gaelic music making (above), the ergonomic cocktail shaker (right), one of the manly' Men! 'of postcard fame, and two nifty singers: baritone Thomas Hampson, blues diva Billie Holiday. (MARTIN
PHOTO: When Bogie met Bacall, she was 19 and he was in his mid4Os and already had a wife. They married the next year.
Section: Self Care How to use nutrition, exercise and other 'home remedies' to keep the problem in check
YENTA, THE MATCHMAKING insulin hormone, attaches herself to lonely, befuddled Mr. Glucose, a bachelor sugar molecule, and goes knocking at Miss Cell's door. Familiar with Yenta's knock, Miss Cell opens the door. "Have I got a match for you," Yenta tells Miss Cell, and pushes Mr. Glucose inside. Together, Mr. Glucose and Miss Cell make beautiful energy.
That is how the body's energy production is supposed to work. But for 11 million Americans with adult-onset (type-II) diabetes mellitus, it doesn't.
Yenta the matchmaker can't find the door (the cell's receptor) because there isn't one; or there aren't enough matchmakers to handle all the bachelor sugar molecules; or the would-be matchmakers aren't very good at their job. Adult-onset diabetes is the result.
As a person with diabetes, you probably know that you're at risk for heart infection, blindness and slow healing. Each person reacts to diabetes in his or her own way. This means each person has to be under a doctor's care and constantly monitored. This need can not be overstated. What's good for your diabetic friend may be bad for you.
Every diabetic's goal is to maintain his or her blood sugar (glucose) and blood fat as close to normal levels as possible. The good news is that you can virtually eliminate all symptoms of diabetes -- in other words, control it -- by carefully following the regimen you and your doctor work out.
Here's how to begin. If you're planning any changes in your current regimen, talk them over first with your doctor.
Start with the ADA diet. The American Diabetes Association revised its nutritional guidelines in 1986. Although knowledge of dietary needs is continually expanding, these guidelines are based on the current consensus of medical experts. "Each person's diet should be tailored to fit Franz, M.S., R.D., vice president of nutrition at the International Diabetes Center in Minneapolis. The ADA diet includes the following principles: Load up on carbohydrates. The ADA recommends that a type-II diabetes diet can include up to 50 to 60 percent of calories from carbohydrates. "Generally, the recommendation will be somewhere around 50 percent," Franz says. This means that half or more of your diet should consist of cereals, grains, breads, pasta, beans, peas, fruits and vegetables. (Each gram of carbohydrate equals four calories.) Go easy on protein. The American Diabetes Association says protein should amount to only about 12 to 20 percent of your daily calorie intake. Usually this means going easy on foods like meat and milk. (Each gram of protein equals four calories.) Trim the fats. The ADA wants you to cut a lot of fat out of your diet budget. Calories from fat should account for no more than 30 percent of your calories. (well within this guideline.)
Every chance you get, replace artery-clogging saturated fat (predominant in butter, non-lean meats and high-fat dairy products) with polyunsaturated or, better yet, monounsaturated fat, or with complex carbohydrates, Franz says. Monounsaturated fats are prevalent in olive oil and canola oil. (Each gram of fat equals nine calories.)
Eat food with fiber. Natural fiber in food has been found to have a host of beneficial effects for everyone. That goes double for people with diabetes. The ADA advises you to gradually head for 40 grams of dietary fiber a day (or 25 grams per 1,000 calories for those on low-calorie diets). Whole-wheat products, barley, oats, legumes, vegetables and fruits are the best sources of fiber and essential nutrients. One possible benefit fiber provides diabetics is lower cholesterol levels. "The water-soluble fibers found in legumes, oats, barley and fruit, when eaten in a low-fat diet, have been shown to lower blood-fat levels, "the gastrointestinal tract," they may also cause the energy (sugar) in food to be absorbed at a slower rate, giving your insulin a chance to keep your blood sugar on a more even keel.
Fiber also helps keep you from feeling hungry. "I think one of the main benefits of fiber is that it adds bulk to the diet," Franz says. "For type-II people who are trying to control their weight and so are on restricted calories, bulk lets people feel fuller."
Besides giving you that pleasantly satiated feeling, fiber foods are good for you. "They're often high in important vitamins and minerals," Franz says.
Cut your cholesterol intake. The ADA recommendation is that you should eat no more than 300 milligrams of cholesterol daily. This means cutting way down on organ meats and egg yolks, and restraining yourself when it comes to meat and dairy fats.
Substitute for sugar. When eaten alone, sucrose (table sugar), such as potatoes and wheat. But research shows that when eaten in combination with equal amounts of other starches, sucrose doesn't seem to have this effect. So the ADA says you may be able to have modest amounts of sugar, as found in very simple desserts, such as a cookie or a small dish of frozen yogurt, if your diabetes is under control and you're not too overweight. (Testing your blood glucose occasionally after meals that include such sweets can tell you how well your body is tolerating them.) Otherwise, check out alternative sweeteners. "They're certainly safe to use," Franz says. The ADA has approved noncaloric sweeteners, such as aspartame and saccharin, and sweeteners with calories, such as fructose and sorbitol. Some considerations: Proceed with caution. People with well-controlled diabetes can use fructose and sorbitol (both found in fruit) with little problem, the ADA says. Fructose raises blood sugar the least of the caloric sweeteners. But, warns Stanley Sinai School of Medicine of the City University of New York, "in people with low insulin reserves, fructose will raise triglycerides," blood fats that are dangerous at high levels. And in large amounts, both fructose and sorbitol can cause diarrhea. Beware: calories ahead. Calorie-rich fructose and sorbitol (which breaks down in the body to form fructose), are not exchanges for the noncaloric sweeteners. So if you've added fructose and taken out saccharin, you've still added calories to your diet.
Consider eating smaller meek more often. Usually, the diabetic body can handle smaller meals more easily because the smaller the meal, the less insulin is needed to handle the glucose influx from each meal, Franz says. Less glucose equals less insulin equals more constant blood-sugar levels. Some diabetes meal plans call for three meals a day but others call for three small meals plus one to three small snacks be-tween meals (a piece of fruit or a couple of crackers, for example). because "often if people go too long between meals, they get so hungry they can't control what they eat at the next meal." Check with your doctor for a recommendation.
Don't take fish-oil supplements. Fish oil, especially the kind containing lots of omega-3 fatty acids, may be bad news for people with diabetes. It's been shown to increase blood glucose levels if you take too much of it. One study showed a loss of blood sugar control when 5.5 grams of omega-3 were taken daily for a month. But eating fish is encouraged -- it's part of a healthy diet and in this form it won't provide too much omega-3 fatty acids.
Use care with alcohol. Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood-sugar level. That's why the ADA recommends you drink only in moderation-no more than one to two ounces of alcohol at a time and no more than twice a week. That's a weekly maximum of three ounces of distilled beverage, eight ounces drink with food. Light beer and dry wine may be the way to go because they have fewer carbohydrates; it's important to get your carbohydrates from food. Also, remember to treat booze like fat. Exchange alcohol calories for fat calories, the ADA says, because alcohol is high in calories per gram and because it's metabolized like fat.
Lose weight. "Weight loss is the number-one priority," Dr. Mirsky says. Eighty percent of type-II diabetics are overweight. They tend to live a sedentary life and eat a lot. Obesity may obliterate insulin receptors so sugar can't enter the cells and so remains in your blood. If you're overweight, diet and exercise almost certainly can help you lose some weight and get your blood sugar back to normal, and that may be all you need, Dr. Mirsky says. "Sometimes, all you have to lose is 5 or 10 pounds and you're fine." Good advice:
Don't go to extremes. The prudent diet, improved eating habits and exercise. A low-fat diet with moderate calorie restriction (women, not less than 1,200 calories a day, men not less than 1,500) works best for diabetics.
Don't let frustration drive you to a fad diet, Franz warns. "If all the fad diets worked, we wouldn't need new ones all the time. They may not be nutritionally sound, and they may be so restrictive people can't stick with them. Plus, they don't help you change your eating behavior in the long run."
Nor should you skip meals in hopes of losing weight, Franz says. This "minifasting" is ultimately self-defeating. "So many people skip breakfast and lunch. Then they go on an eating binge later." Fads, fasting and skipping meals don't work, and you could end up losing control of your diabetes altogether.
Make losing excess weight a family affair. "If the whole family doesn't make nutritional Franz says," it will be hard, if not impossible, for the person with diabetes to do it alone."
Exercise. The benefits of regular exercise for everybody, diabetic or not, are well recognized. But people with diabetes have even more reason to get their arms and legs moving and their hearts pumping. Exercise strengthens the heart, helps control blood-sugar levels, and increases circulation to the body's extremities. Exercise can cut the level of cholesterol and triglycerides while raising the level of HDL (high-density lipoprotein) cholesterol (the "good" kind that protects against heart disease). Exercise helps you control your weight, increase stamina and sleep more soundly.
And exercise really helps shore up your emotional fortitude. "Regular exercise has been shown to have beneficial effects on mood, especially for depression," says health psychologist Paula Hartman -- Stein, Ph.D., of the Akron General Medical Center, in Ohio.
There's also some evidence that exercise increases the number of find a place to put glucose, and glucose can get to where it's needed -- inside the cells.
Repetitive, rhythmic movements involving the large muscles -- arms and legs -- are best for people with diabetes. Exercises that work the large muscles include walking, jogging, swimming, rowing and bicycling. In order to attain the maximum benefits, you have to exercise regularly and do it at least three times a week for 20 to 30 minutes, the experts say. Your doctor may even prescribe an exercise five to seven times a week. Don't lift weights. And don't do anything else that involves pushing or pulling heavy objects. It raises your blood-sugar levels and blood pressure, and can make diabetic eye disease worse. Start walking. "The best exercise for people with diabetes is brisk walking," says Henry Dolger, M.D., former chief of the diabetes department at Mount Sinai Medical Center, in New York City. "It's by far the safest, least stressful efficiency of every unit of insulin taken in or produced by the body," Dr. Dolger explains. "That means you get more effectiveness out of every gram of food you eat than you would without exercise. It also gives you a great sense of well-being and requires no equipment." If you started walking a mile every day, burning 100 calories, in only a year you'd shed more than 10 pounds. Check with your doctor. If your diabetes isn't under control or you have complications, exercise can make it worse. If you've got high blood pressure, that also needs to be controlled first. Your doctor may want you to take a stress test. He'll want to judge the effects of any medication you're taking.
Take care of your teeth. "A person with diabetes has to maintain an absolutely immaculate mouth," says Roger P. Levin, D.D.S., chairman of the Maryland State Dental Association Council on Dental Practice. "Because diabetics are much more gum disease." Be meticulous. Everything a nondiabetic person should do for dental health, a diabetic person should do even more conscientiously. This means more frequent visits to your dentist and especially conscientious brushing and flossing to control plaque and tartar. Pursue a perfect fit. "Restorations must be very well contoured in a diabetic," Dr. Levin says. Poorfitting dentures, bridges or crowns can cause mouth sores, which can become serious because of inefficient healing. And because wounds don't heal well, the person with diabetes is not a candidate for most of the newer techniques, such as dental implants.
Reduce stress. "Stress and anxiety can destabilize diabetic control in two ways," Dr. Hartman -- Stein says. "Some people's blood sugar can skyrocket, others' goes way down. And when diabetics are depressed or anxious, frequently they don't adhere to their diet and exercise regimen very well."
Diabetes, with its constant emotional and physical demands, is a stressful stressful life events they're having trouble coping with, they should seek the help of a mental-health professional," Dr. Hartman-Stein says. Here are some ways you can relieve stress: Learn how to relax. Dr. Hartman-Stein tested various relaxation-therapy techniques for diabetes control and found that they "may be helpful." Relaxation techniques focus on controlled breathing, relaxing muscles and visualization, and can be learned from professionals, books and articles. (See "Unwind and Destress: Part II" in the August 1990 issue.) Improve your perspective. You are more than a case of diabetes. "Some people do focus on it too much. They label themselves as having this chronic illness, and it colors everything," Dr. Hartman -- Stein says. "Well, it doesn't have to color everything. You do have to be more disciplined about your daily life in terms of your eating schedule, but it doesn't have to hamper you. You need to add uplifts to your daily life for a box of cookies to make themselves feel better. One woman told me she rents videotapes and indulges herself when she's feeling depressed or stressed." Learn how to think. Cognitive therapy teaches you to "recognize the kinds of thinking you engage in that might be affecting your mood," says Dr. Hartman -- Stein. "You might have thoughts like, 'My legs are really ugly because of the marks from injecting insulin,' or 'I feel like a freak every time l have to test my urine.' You can turn those negative thoughts about the regimen into a more rational way of looking at it. You can instead think, 'Nobody's noticing those little marks in my skin but me,' or 'Testing my urine IS a chemistry experiment." (See "Unwind and Destress: Part I" in the July 1990 issue.)
Test your blood. Over-the-counter blood-glucose testing kits can run into money -- up to $750 a year if you test your blood four times" Franz says. "Urine testing for type-diabetes is quite inaccurate because you can get quite a high blood-sugar level before sugar spills into the urine," especially if you're older. Blood testing can tell you when you have high blood sugar without symptoms. If your diabetes is mild or controlled, Franz says, you may not need to test your blood as often as four times a day. But you do need to know how often and how to test accurately. Ask your doctor or diabetes educator.
Use care with OTCs. Some over-thecounter drugs (OTCs) contain sugar and other ingredients that can disturb blood-sugar levels. Always check the label for any warning directed to people with diabetes, but don't stop there. Ask the pharmacist or your doctor if you're not sure, and be sure to monitor your reactions after taking any OTC medication. Here are some things to look out for: Ephedrine or epinephrine. These are used in preparations that treat respiratory illnesses, but they can can phenylephrine, a drug found in nasal sprays and cold preparations. Caffeine. The main ingredient in OTC appetite suppressants is caffeine, which can raise blood-sugar levels when taken in large amounts. Many headache and cold medications also are loaded with caffeine. Large quantities of aspirin. Taken for chronic pain, big doses can lower blood-sugar levels. Occasional small amounts, such as two tablets for a headache, are not enough to worry about.
Excerpted from The Doctors Book of Home Remedies by the editors of Prevention Magazine Heatth Books.
Section: YOUNG SKIN FOR LIFE
How to make sure you're getting maximum protection with minimum bother
As summer arrives, you probably want to do two things: (1) enjoy outdoor activities, and (2) protect your skin against cancer and premature photoaging caused by sun exposure. But can you really do both?
Yes -- because of today's sun- shielding products. But a lot of factors can influence how effective -- or ineffective -- these products are. Here's how to use them for maximum effect.
The two basic types of sun protection are sunblocks and sunscreens. Traditionally, a block gives top-notch protection because it's a compound with the consistency of paste -- frequently titanium dioxide or zinc or iron oxide -- which actually reflects the harmful ultraviolet rays away from the skin.
This offers maximum protection but is also very thick (like the white goop on a lifeguard's nose) and not the type of product you could easily get used to using all over, every day. Still, a sunblock can be the nose, under the eyes or the tops of your ears (if your hair doesn't cover them). A sunscreen doesn't reflect the sun but instead works like melanin, which is your skin's natural defense system, to absorb harmful ultraviolet rays before they can damage your skin cells.
Because they're absorbed into your skin rather than sitting on top of it, sunscreens are more cosmetically acceptable. They're available in various consistencies including lotions, oils, creams and sprays.
The basic sunscreening agent is the chemical para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). PABA is very effective against the sun's burning ultraviolet-B rays (those that contribute most directly to skin cancer) and also provides minimal protection against ultraviolet-A rays. However, it can cause an allergic reaction in some people and may also stain fabrics.
For these reasons, most sunscreens today use derivatives of PABA that are gentler to the skin and clothes. PABA and its derivatives protect primarily against the UV-B rays and offer less protection to be harmless, penetrate deeply and cause underlying damage that is responsible for much of the premature wrinkling that your skin undergoes. To get the best protection, opt for a sunscreen that contains benzophenones, which screen out some of the UV-A rays. THE NUMBERS GAME
The SPF number on a sunscreen tells you how much longer the sunscreen will let you be exposed to sunlight without your getting sunburn, compared to your reddening time when not using the sunscreen. For instance, an SPF of 15 lets you stay out 15 times longer than you could without it. (The SPF numbers pertain to protection from UV-B rays only; there is no established standard of measurement for UV-A protection.)
The SPF number on the label refers to the protective value the sunscreen had when it was tested under controlled laboratory conditions. This means, among other things, that the SPF numbers are based on the use of considerably more sunscreen than most of us would apply at one time. Also, heat, humidity
There's a common misunderstanding that by reapplying a sunscreen you double its protection. Not true. Reapplying an SPF 15 brings your protection back to the original 15; it does not give you the protection of a 30.
A few years ago, 15 was the highest SPF you could buy. "Under ideal conditions this would be protection enough for just about everyone," says Prevention advisor Norman Levine, M.D., chief of dermatology, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center." But many things -- from sweating to rubbing -- can compromise the amount of sunscreen actually at work.
"Because many people don't really know how long it takes before they start to redden and also because we don't use sunscreens under laboratory conditions, I recommend a sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15."
Sunscreens are now available in multiples into the 40s; however there's some debate about whether such high SPFs are necessary. "An SPF of more than 15 might be indicated if all day in the direct sun," recommends Dr. Levine. "For most instances an SPF 15 is fine. If you're in doubt, give yourself the extra protection."
One of the main qualities a sunscreen is tested for is "substantivity," which means how well it stays on and continues giving you the SPF on the label.
Even the highest SPF can't help if it washes away. "Even though you're not planning on swimming, it makes sense to choose a waterproof or water-resistant product," says Dr. Levine. Sweat is water, and a waterproof sunscreen will stay on better, in general. USING IT RIGHT
Take advantage of the diverse types of sunscreen base available. "Choose your sunscreen the way you choose a moisturizer," suggests Dr. Levine. "If you have oily skin there are products with a gel or alcohol base that won't contribute to the problem."
Apply sunscreen at least 30 minutes before you go out. it's important because it takes your skin this long to absorb the protective chemicals to the level at which they'll be effective.
Reapply sunscreen after swimming -- even if the sunscreen is waterproof. While the water itself may not wash the protection away, most of us towel off when we come out, and even the best sunscreen can use a boost then.
Use your sunscreen all the time -- not just when you're planning to be outside. UV-A rays can penetrate glass, so that even in your car or sitting indoors in a sunny spot, you're exposed to them. UV-A is also present all day all year long, unlike UV-B, which is much more intense in the summer.
Be especially protective of your skin... Between the hours of 10 and 3 when the UV-B rays are at their most intense. When you're at high elevations. The higher above sea level you are, the less radiation is blocked out by the atmosphere. When you the coolness, but water reflects the rays back onto your skin.
By Pamela Boyer
WHAT YOUR LABEL IS TRYING TO TELL YOU
SPF 15 Means a Sun Protection Factor of 15. If you normally start to turn pink in half an hour, you can stay out for 15 times that long or 7 1/2 hours with an SPF-15 sunscreen.
BROAD SPECTRUM Means that this product contains ingredients that will give some protection against both UV-A and UV-B rays.
WATERPROOF Means that you're protected at the SPF value even after four 20-minute swims. "Water-resistant" means the protection lasts through two 20-minute swims.
PABA-FREE If you're sensitive to PABA and its derivatives, you can turn to sunscreens that use chemicals such as cinnamates, salicylates and/or benzophenones as sunscreening agents.
Expiration date is also listed on some sunscreens to be sure the active ingredients are functioning at the stated SPF.
Searching for targets in Iraq // Misgovernment is of four kinds, often in combination. They are: 1) tyranny or oppression, of which history provides so many well-known examples that they do not need citing; 2) excessive ambition, such as Athens' attempted conquest of Sicily in the Peloponnesian War, Philip II's of England via the Armada, Germany's twice-attempted rule of Europe by a self-conceived master race, Japan's bid for an empire of Asia; 3) incompetence or decadence, as in the case of the late Roman empire, the last Romanovs and the last imperial dynasty of China; and finally 4) folly or perversity. -Barbara W. Tuchman When President George W. Bush in his January State of the Union address pronounced the sentence of doom on Saddam Hussein ("America will do what is necessary to ensure our nation's security .... I will not wait on events, while dangers gather"), I assumed that he was striking at a target of rhetorical convenience. The war on terrorism was not going as well as planned (transformed into a Connecticut suburb, bombs exploding every seven or eight days on a bus in Israel), and who better than the tyrant of Baghdad to stand surrogate for all the world's evildoers? The man was undoubtedly a villain, a brutal psychopath who murdered children and poisoned village wells, stored biological weapons in hospitals, subjected his enemies to unspeakable torture, and imprisoned his friends in the cages of perpetual fear. Not a nice fellow. Who would not be glad to learn that he had retired from politics or died in a traffic accident? If Mr. Bush chose to express his disapproval in what he called "the language of right and wrong," who was I to deny him his demagogue's right to issue harebrained threats? The opinion was not widely shared in New York among people possessed of an historical memory (i.e., by individuals who remembered the CIA's staging of "the glorious march to Havana" in the spring of 1961, or the "light at the end of Westmoreland in the forests of Vietnam), but I held to it throughout the spring and early summer even as Mr. Bush mounted the flag-draped rostra at West Point and the Virginia Military Institute to threaten with the wrath of eagles faroff men of "mad ambitions," declaring null and void "the Cold War doctrines of deterrence and containment," championing the cause of "forward-looking and resolute... preemptive action." When asked by worried friends and acquaintances whether the President was borrowing his geopolitical theory from the diaries of Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler, I assured them that the President didn't have the patience to read more than two or three pages of a Tom Clancy novel. True, the National Security Council was staffed by think-tank ideologues, and yes, some of the policy analysts strolling through the corridors of the White House imagined themselves wearing the uniform of the Bengal Lancers, but no, not even the Bush Administration was so stupid as to take up arms against a figment of its own imagination. assumptions were poorly placed. The spectacle of the American government making preparations for an invasion of Iraq suggested that maybe the Bush Administration was, in fact, stupid enough to call down air strikes on the last four paragraphs of one of the Pentagon's apocalyptic briefing papers. The President was hopping boldly out of golf carts in Texas and Maine to tell the traveling White House press corps that "regime change" was coming soon to downtown Baghdad; in appreciation of the President's enthusiasm and by way of reinforcing his credibility, the Defense Department was supplying the newspapers with documents supposedly top secret that sketched out tactical solutions to the problem of blitzkrieg (the advantages of a simultaneous attack from three directions balanced against the surprise of a swift commando raid, requisitions for 300,000 troops compared to those for only 80,000, something grandiloquent and imperial along the lines of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor as opposed to something stylish and postmodern with parachutes, two divisions of light infantry, and a diffusion of Turkish auxiliaries). of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, told a television news camera on August 4 that "there probably will be a war with Iraq. The only question is, is it alone, is it with others, and how long and how costly will it be?" On August 9 a delegation of Iraqi malcontents arrived in Washington to pledge their support of any overthrow of Saddam Hussein that the U.S. Army cared to pay for and arrange. Vice President Dick Cheney spoke to them by video conference from a mountain in Wyoming, reaffirming America's commitment to the principle of regime removal, and Donald Rumsfeld, the secretary of defense, bucked up their spirits with the smiling hope of freedom not far over the military horizon: "Wouldn't it be a wonderful thing if Iraq were similar to Afghanistan, if a bad regime was thrown out, people were liberated, food could come in, borders could be opened, repression could stop, prisons could be opened? I mean, it would be fabulous.; presumably he wasn't referring to the many thousands of people (American soldiers as well as Iraqi civilians) unlucky enough to be killed during the festivities, but none of the Washington correspondents asked why Afghanistan was such a wonderful tourist destination, or when and how it had come to pass that the bandits precariously enthroned in the palace at Kabul exemplified the goodness of free and democratic government. Nor did anybody spoil the upbeat mood of the secretary's press conference with moral or legal questions. Against every precedent in international law, in violation of the United Nations Charter, and without consent of the American Congress, the Bush Administration was proposing to sack a heathen city that had done it no demonstrable harm, and the news media were by and large happy to welcome the event with obedient commentary supportive of the belief that if America allowed Saddam to acquire weapons of mass destruction we would suffer consequences frightful to contemplate and terrible to behold. The lead editorial in The Economist on August 3 summed up the consensus choices now are to give up and give in, or to remove Mr. Hussein before he gets his bomb. Painful as it is, our vote is for war." Give up to whom? Give in to what? The government didn't stoop to answer simpleminded questions; neither did the grand viziers of the print and broadcast media, who preferred to discuss the complexities of the logistics rather than the purpose of a policy apparently directed at nothing else except the fear of the future, that always dark and dangerous place, where, in five years or maybe ten, something bad is bound to happen. Competing television networks scheduled different time slots for the Pentagon's forthcoming fireworks display-before and after November's congressional election, in early January when the weather around Baghdad improved, next April because the Air Force needed six months to replenish its inventory of precision bombs. Competing newspaper columnists advanced competing adjectives to characterize the "extreme danger" presented to "the entire civilized world," but none of them anybody who didn't happen to be living in Iraq; important military authorities appeared on the Sunday-morning talk shows to endorse policies of "forward deterrence" and "anticipatory self-defense," but none of them could think of a good reason why Saddam would make the mistake of attacking the United States; the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on July 31 and August 1 conducted hearings on the question of Iraq and learned that its expert witnesses couldn't say for certain whether they knew what they were talking about. The few shards of undisputed fact collected over two days of testimony suggested that Saddam doesn't sponsor Al Qaeda (or any of the other terrorist brigades that have asked him for money and explosives over the last eleven years), that the Iraqi army, never formidable, is less dangerous now than when it was routed in the four days of the Gulf War, the Iraqi Air Force of no consequence, the civilian economy too impoverished to support the reconstruction of the nuclear -- weapons program dismantled by UNSCOM between a small-time thug apt to deploy chemical or biological weapons (if he possesses chemical or biological weapons) only as a last and cowardly defense of his own person. A government that must hold Senate hearings to discover whether it has a reason to go to war is a government that doesn't know the meaning of war. The inanity of the circumstance accounted for the mock -- heroic tone of President Bush's golf-cart communiques ("I call upon all nations to do everything they can to stop these terrorist killers. Thank you. Now watch this drive") as well as for the sublime complacence of the innumerable spokesmen testifying to the certainties of America's virtue, truth, justice, and power. Consistent with the latter set of assumptions, two of the statements presented to Senator Biden's committee invite lengthy quotation because they speak to the character of a government in the state of decadence. Thus, the heroics of Lieutenant General Thomas McInerney (retired), former assistant vice chief of staff of the to discuss a war of liberation to remove Saddam's regime from Iraq. I will not dwell on the merits of why he should be removed. Suffice it to say we must preempt threats such as those posed by Saddam Hussein .... I will now focus on the way to do it very expeditiously and with minimum loss of life in both the coalition forces, the Iraqi military and people themselves, and at the same time maintain a relatively small footprint in the region .... Our immediate objective will be the following: help Iraqi people liberate Iraq and remove Saddam Hussein and his regime, eliminate weapons of mass destruction and production facilities, complete military operations as soon as possible, protect economic infrastructure targets, identify and terminate terrorism connections, establish an interim government as soon as possible. Our longer term objectives will be to bring a democratic government to Iraq using our post-World War II experiences with Germany, Japan and Italy that will influence the region significantly. Now I would like to broadly discuss the combined campaign to to simplify the discussion. Blitz warfare is an intensive 24-hour, seven days a week precision air-centric campaign supported by fast moving ground forces composed of a mixture of heavy, light, airborne, amphibious, special, covert operations working with opposition forces that all use effects-based base operations for their target set and correlate their timing of forces for a devastating violent impact .... // Using the Global Strike Task Force and Naval Strike Forces composed of over 1,000 land- and sea-based aircraft plus a wide array of air and sea launch Cruise missiles, this will be the most massive precision air campaign in history, achieving rapid dominance in the first 72 hours of combat .... All the Iraqi military forces will be told through the opposition forces in our information operations campaign that they have two choices: either help us change regime leadership and build the democracy, or be destroyed. In addition, commanders and men in weapons of mass destruction forces will be told that they will be tried as war criminals if they use their weapons against coalition being sensitive to the question of who is, and who is not, a war criminal. On the same day that he was fitting the First Amendment principle of free speech to the requirement of his information operations campaign (help us build democracy or be destroyed), the United States was demanding immunity from any and all judgments of the International Criminal Court that might find American soldiers guilty of crimes against humanity, which, given the collateral damage soon to be inflicted on the civilian population of Iraq, was a precaution both necessary and wise. Other points in the general's testimony didn't seem as nicely judged. How does it happen that the "most massive precision air campaign in history" leaves but "a relatively small footprint in the region"? Even if one discounts the devastation of Baghdad as a minor and scarcely noticeable loss, what is to prevent the conflagration likely to erupt in the nearby countries of Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Iran once the U.S. Air Force has lit up the religious war? Who prevents Ariel Sharon from upgrading with nuclear weapons the Israeli program of "preemptive assassination," and, in the relatively sizable footprint of an oil price marked up to $50 or $70 a barrel, what happens to the economies of London, Paris, and New York? The general revealed his plan for waste removal on the first day of the committee hearings, and on the second day Caspar Weinberger, a secretary of defense during the Reagan Administration, matched the general's notion of swift military victory in the desert with an equally fatuous theory of instant political rehabilitation. Observing that in Washington it was always easy to find excuses for inaction, Weinberger reminded the senators of the miraculous American descent on the Caribbean island of Grenada in April 1983: We went into Grenada with more troops than everybody thought we needed. And we had a very successful operation. And prevented the kidnapping and detention of American students. And we got out. And we got out in something under a month. a free election. And we have not been back. Not having kept up with events on Grenada, I have no reason to doubt Weinberger's happy news, and I'm sure that if Fidel Castro were to send another invisible flotilla of gunboats, the U.S. Navy would defend the island against another invisible horde of savage Marxists. Elsewhere in the world, the record of American diplomatic achievement over the last thirty years doesn't inspire a similar degree of confidence. We're good with slogans, but we don't have much talent for fostering the construction of exemplary democracies; we tend to betray our allies, dishonor our treaties, and avoid the waging of difficult or extensive wars. Count through the list of foreign adventures since our hurried departure from Vietnam in April 1975, and we proceed, in random and unseemly sequence, to the exit from Iran and the flight from Lebanon, the pointless assault on Panama, the shutting down of the Gulf War without decisive victory, the abandonment of the Kurds refusal to intrude upon the killing in Rwanda or the Balkans. Drawn to despots whom we hire to represent our freedom-loving commercial interests (Diem, the Shah of Shahs, Somoza, Thieu, Marcos, Jonas Savimbi, Noriega, Saddam Hussein, King Fahd, Arafat, Mobutu Sese Seko, Ariel Sharon), we pretend that our new ally stands as a pillar of democracy in one or another of the world's poorer latitudes, and for however many years the arrangement lasts we send F-16's and messages of humanitarian concern. But then something goes amiss with the band music or the tin mines; the despot's palace guard doesn't know how to fire the machine guns, or fires them at the wrong people, and the prime minister's brother appropriates the traffic in cocaine. We decide that our virtue has been compromised, or that we no longer can afford the cost of the parliament, and we leave by helicopter from the roof of the embassy. The incoherence of our current policy in as our mortal enemy and by the White House as our dearest friend, President Bush committed on Tuesday to the establishment of a Palestinian state, on Thursday to the everlasting kingdom of Zion) suggests that the Washington travel agents have begun considering various estimated times of departure on the assumption that if we can run another "very successful operation" in and out "in something under a month," maybe Oliver North can get everybody to the roof of an embassy to watch the free election. Fortunately for the republic, both Lieutenant General McInerney and Mr. Weinberger have retired from government service; not so fortunately, they retain the habit of mind that has guided the making of American diplomatic and military policy for the last thirty years. As stupefied as Dick Cheney or Donald Rumsfeld by the romance of imperial power, they speak from within a dream as old as the walls of Troy, and watching them bestow the favor of their prophecies on the Senate committee (to divine Saddam's plans, Senator Biden had), it occurred to me that maybe the time had come to reread Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War. Much of the story I'd long forgotten, but I remembered that Athens corrupted its democracy and brought about the ruin of its empire by foolishly attempting the conquest of Sicily, and when I found the relevant chapters (the debate in the Athenian assembly prior to sending a fleet westward into the Ionian Sea), it was as if I were reading the front page of that morning's New York Times or the Pentagon's Defense Planning Guidance discussed on page 76 in this issue of Harper's Magazine. Athens in the winter of 415 B.C. stands alone as the preeminent hegemon of Greece. Sparta for the moment has lost its appetite for war, and the Athenians wish to extend their sovereignty over what was then the whole of the known world, not only as far as Sicily but also beyond Carthage to the Pillars of Hercules. Sophists sit around in the wrestling schools sketching with sticks old men in wine shops babble of victories promised by Egyptian oracles. Ambassadors arrive from Sicily in late March with news of trouble and a request for military assistance. The city of Syracuse threatens to seize the Athenian colony of Segesta, and how can the heirs of noble Pericles stomach so brazen an insult to their pride? What if the Syracusans took it into their heads to attack the glory of Athens? Uproar and loud shouts of defiance. The impetuous Alcibiades presents the case for "forward deterrence" and "anticipatory self-defense," saying that it is in the nature of Athens to do great deeds. As certain as Lieutenant General McInerney of the city's military power, he assures the assembly that Syracuse is easy prey, weak and badly governed. One does not only defend oneself against a superior power when one is attacked; one takes measures in advance to prevent the attack materializing. And it is not possible for us to calculate, like housekeepers, exactly how much empire we want to have Athenians know as little about Sicily as Senator Biden knows about Iraq ("For the most part ignorant of the size of the island and of the numbers of its inhabitants," says Thucydides, "they did not realize that they were taking on a war of almost the same magnitude as their war against the Peloponnesians"), but they are not the kind of men who stoop to count a crowd of mere barbarians. Prudent Nicias thinks the Athenians too reckless in their enthusiasm. Like Alcibiades a general, but older and not as eager in his ambition, Nicias raises doubts similar to the ones released in the newspapers during the third week of August by several senior Republican statesmen (among them House Majority Leader Dick Armey and Brent Scowcroft, a former national security adviser) clearly worried both by President Bush's simplistic notions of geopolitics and by the absence of allies, either Arab or European, willing to join the American march on Baghdad. They employed a modem vocabulary, but the substance of their assigns to Nicias: In going to Sicily you are leaving many enemies behind you, and you apparently want to make new ones there and have them also on your hands .... Even if we did conquer the Sicilians, there are so many of them and they live so far off that it would be very difficult to govern them. It is senseless to go against people who, even if conquered, could not be controlled, while failure would leave us much worse off than we were before we made the attempt .... The next best thing is to make a demonstration of our power and then, after a short time, go away again. We all know that what is most admired is what is farthest off and least liable to have its reputation put to the test .... The right thing is that we should spend our new gains at home and on ourselves instead of on these exiles who are begging for assistance and whose interest it is to tell lies and make us believe them, who have nothing danger to others and, if they are successful, will not be properly grateful, while if they fail in any way they will involve their friends in their own ruin. The argument fails to make an impression. So excessive is the enthusiasm of the majority, says Thucydides, "that the few who actually were opposed to the expedition were afraid of being thought unpatriotic if they voted against it, and therefore kept quiet." The assembly declares for war, and over the next several months Athens musters an invasion fleet conforming to the current Pentagon doctrine of "overwhelming force" (134 triremes, expensively gilded; impressive numbers of archers, stingers, and javelin throwers; merchant vessels stocked with soothsayers and cavalry horses), and on a sunny day in July 415 B.C., trumpets blow, priests pour wine into golden bowls, and "by far the most costly and splendid" expedition "ever sent out by a single city" sails to its appointment with destruction. During the last weeks of reports of a splendid and costly American force gathering in the Middle East-merchant vessels putting to sea loaded with armored vehicles, helicopters, large stores of ammunition; the air base at Qatar upgraded with a runway convenient to heavy bombers and equipped with tents capable of housing 3,800 troops; a premium of $2 a barrel added to the price of Arabian oil to meet any sudden shift of supply or demand. Speaking to a battery of press cameras in Crawford, Texas, President Bush said that yes, he was aware of questions about the wisdom of invading Iraq (the doubts expressed both by members of his own party and, increasingly, in various alarmed sectors of the national news media), and yes, he would "listen very carefully" to what other people had to say, but no, he didn't think it necessary to complicate the decision with too much extraneous discussion. "America needs to know," he said, "I'll be making up my mind based upon the latest intelligence friends and allies." Unwilling to expose "the latest intelligence" to the vulgar, democratic light of day, the President reserves the right to do what he, and he alone ("forward-looking and resolute," as brave as Alcibiades, disinclined to "wait on events, while dangers gather"), deems just. Taken together with the proven incompetence of the American intelligence agencies and the delusions of military grandeur cherished by the secretary of defense, the President's belated assurance that he would "continue to consult" ("When I say I'm a patient man, I mean I'm a patient man...") sounded both grudging and false. He had been shaking the fist of war at Iraq for two years, talking up the prospect of "regime change" to audiences both foreign and domestic, and how could the noble heir to the throne of Teddy Roosevelt retreat from his promise of retribution frightful to contemplate and terrible to behold? The question was framed not by the the administration and currently serving on the Pentagon's Defense Review Board. James Schlesinger, former secretary of defense, spoke for the jingoist majority: "Given all we have said as a leading world power about the necessity of regime change in Iraq means that our credibility would be badly damaged if that regime change did not take place." The ancient Greeks at least had a prize in view-the harbors of Sicily and the wealth of Carthage; the Bush Administration erases the distinction between the reasons of state and the uses of publicity, and if we invade Iraq apparently we'll be doing so to make credible the President's boyish and theatrical saber-rattling with a blurb from the U.S. Air Force. As a form of misgovernment that satisfies all the definitions set forth at the head of this essay in the epigraph borrowed from Barbara Tuchman's book The March of Folly, I can think of none more disastrous than the failure to distinguish fiction from fact, to substitute for the waging of war the making of war movies the American occupation of the Philippines. Objecting to the fraudulent piety of statesmen who don't know what they're saying, Twain wrote a story, "The War Prayer," in which an "aged stranger" enters a church where the congregation has been listening to an heroic sermon about the glory to be won in battle by young patriots armed with the love of God. Motioning the startled minister to stand aside, the aged stranger improvises a bitter peroration that makes clear the true meaning of the prayer: O Lord our God, help us to tear their soldiers to bloody shreds with our shells; help us to cover their smiling fields with the pale forms of their patriot dead; help us to drown the thunder of the guns with the shrieks of their wounded, writhing in pain; help us to lay waste their humble homes with a hurricane of fire; help us to wring the hearts of their unoffending widows with unavailing grief; help us to turn them out roofless with their little children rags and hunger and thirst, sports of the sun flames of summer and the icy winds of winter, broken in spirit, worn with travail, imploring Thee for the refuge of the grave and denied it-for our sakes who adore Thee, Lord, blast their hopes, blight their lives, protract their bitter pilgrimage, make heavy their steps, water their way with their tears, stain the white snow with the blood of their wounded feet! We ask it, in the spirit of love, of Him Who is the Source of Love, and Who is the ever-faithful refuge and friend of all that are sore beset and seek His aid with humble and contrite hearts. Amen. The story didn't see the light of print until 1923, thirteen years after Twain's death. The editors to whom he tendered the manuscript thought it "unsuitable" for publication at a moment of high and patriotic feeling.
A picnic can be wonderful summertime adventure and inexpensive way to steal some time away from the kids. If you're not in love (or like) right now, you can share the blanket, the basket and the conversation with a close girlfriend. The two of you can pick some wildflowers, play spades or talk about the ones that got away. Don't forget to bring along a camera to capture all the fun! Alfresco dining is as close as your backyard or nearest park, but you can cozy up almost anywhere-from a lakeside wharf to a roadside rest stop. to keep foods cold, juice in cans or boxes (an be frozen and used in your insulated cooler instead of an ice block or pack. Replace the usual fare of hot dogs, potato salad and (hip with fresh fruits and vegetables for a healthy picnic meal. If you're planning to bring any salads with mayonnaise or oil-based dressing, pack and chill the dressing separately; then combine with ingredients when you're ready to serve. You an hit the roof with crystal by candlelight pictured above. But the menu is incidental when the mood, the moonlight and the sparkler -- champagne or cider -- are right. The setting needn't be all-out fancy; concentrate on one or two elements, such as a linen tablecloth. A citronella candle will drive mosquitoes away while it keeps the ambience glowing. To add drama to your evening, put on some Nat Cole oldies and let him croon. If you're in a more up-tempo mood, try the Brand New Heavies. For our fabulous picnic recipes, turn to page 86 PICNICKING FOR TWO BY JONELL: NASH CHICKEN SATE WITH PEANUTS SAUCE page 81 2 chicken-breast halves, boned, skinned (about 4 ounces each) Marinade: 2 tablespoons low-sodium soy sauce or tamari 1 tablespoon brown sugar 1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 1 tablespoon vegetable oil 1 small clove garlic, minced 1 teaspoon ground ginger 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin seed 1/2 teaspoon crushed red-pepper flakes Peanut Sauce: 1/4 cup hot water 1/4 cup smooth peanut butter 1 tablespoon 1-inch-wide strips. In medium-size glass bowl, combine marinade ingredients. Add chicken; toss to coat well. Cover and marinate in refrigerator, stirring occasionally, at least 2 hours. Prepare grin or broiler. Meanwhile, prepare peanut sauce: In medium-size bowl, using whisk, blend hot water and peanut butter. Stir in lime juice and brown sugar until blended. Thread chicken on 8-inch wooden skewers that have been soaked in water (to prevent burning), saving leftover marinade. Grill or broil, about 5 inches from heat source, 10 to 12 minutes, turning frequently and basting with leftover marinade. Serve chicken sate with peanut sauce for dipping. Makes 2 servings. Per serving: 431 calories, 37 grams protein, 25 grams fat, 18 grams carbohydrate, 829 milligrams sodium, 66 milligrams cholesterol. SPINACH RAVIOLI AND CHEESE SALAD page 81 1/2 pound spinach ravioli, tortellini or other shaped pasta such as fussili or rotelli 1/2 pound smoked mozzarella or other smoked cheese, diced 1 cup cherry tomatoes sliced ripe olives 1 small scallion, sliced Dressing: 1/4 cup olive or vegetable oil 2 tablespoons cider or Balsamic vinegar 1/4 teaspoon dried oregano Salt (optional) Dash cayenne pepper Cook pasta according to package directions. Meanwhile, in medium-size bowl, using whisk or fork, vigorously beat together all dressing ingredients. Drain pasta; rinse with cold water and drain again. Add pasta and remaining ingredients to bowl; gently toss to mix and coat. Refrigerate until ready to serve or pack. Makes 3 servings. Per serving: 635 calories, 28 grams protein, 47 grams fat, 28 grams carbohydrate, 793 milligrams sodium, 121 milligrams cholesterol. CHILLED AVOCADO SOUP page 82 2 ripe avocados 3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 1 cup Low-fat plain yogurt 1-1/2 cups chicken broth 2 large fresh basil leaves, slivered 1/4 teaspoon salt (optional) 1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper Optional garnishes: basil leaves, tin lemon slices, thin radish slices Pit and peel avocados; coarsely chop. In large bowl, combine avocados yogurt, broth, basil, salt (if desired) and pepper. Transfer mixture to food processor or blender container; process, scraping down sides of container, until smooth and blended. Transfer to bowl; cover and refrigerate until ready to serve or pack. Garnish as desired. Makes 3 to 4 servings. Per each of 4 servings: 211 calories, 6 grams -protein, 17 grams fat, 13 grams carbohydrate, 420 milligrams sodium, 3 milligrams cholesterol. TROPICAL SHRIMP SALAD page 82 1/2 pound raw shrimp, unpeeled Water 1/2 teaspoon salt (optional) 1/2 teaspoon ground black pepper 1 large bay leaf 2 ripe papayas (1 large, 1 small) 1/4 cup prepared salsa 2 tablespoons lime juice 1/4 cup thinly sliced celery 1/4 cup finely chopped red bell pepper 1 small scallion, finely chopped 2 tablespoons chopped cilantro or watercress In colander, thoroughly rinse shrimp with cold water; drain. In large skillet, place shrimp in single layer; add just enough water to cover, salt (if heat, bring to boil; cover and immediately remove from heat. Let steam 2 minutes; drain in colander. Peel and, if desired, devein shrimp. Halve and peel small papaya. Using small spoon, scoop out seeds; dice. In medium-size bowl, combine salsa, half the lime juice, celery, bell pepper, scallion and cilantro; stir in shrimp and diced papaya until mixed and coated: Refrigerate at least 1 hour or until time to serve or pack. Halve large papaya lengthwise; remove seeds. Peel, if desired; brush with remaining lime juice. Fill papaya shells with shrimp mixture. Makes 2 servings. Per serving: 240 calories, 21 grams protein, 2 grams fat, 36 grams carbohydrate, 344 milligrams sodium, 141 milligrams cholesterol. CUTOUT CHOCOLATE COOKIES page 82 1/2 cup butter or margarine 3/4 cup sugar 1 large egg 1 teaspoon vanilla extract 1-1/2 cups unbleached all-purpose flour 1/3 cup cocoa powder. 1/2 teaspoon baking powder 1/2 teaspoon baking soda 1/4 teaspoon salt (, egg and vanilla until light and fluffy. In separate bowl, combine flour, cocoa, baking powder, baking soda and salt (if desired); stir into creamed mixture, blending well. Chill dough about 1 hour or until firm enough to roll. Heat oven to 325deg F. On lightly floured surface or between 2 pieces. of waxed paper, roll out half the dough at a time to 1/4-inch thickness. Using 2-to-3-inch cookie cutters, cut dough into desired shapes; arrange, without touching one another, on ungreased baking sheet. Bake 5 to 7 minutes or until no indentation remains when touched lightly. Cool slightly; using spatula, remove from baking sheet to wire rack to cool completely. Makes about 3 dozen cookies. Per cookie: 62 calories, 0.85 gram protein, 3 grams fat, 9 grams carbohydrate, 45 milligrams sodium, 13 milligrams cholesterol. SOFT-SHELL-CRAB SANDWICHES WITH HERB MAYONNAISE page 84 Fresh soft-shell crabs, seasonal delicacy, an, available from about Memorial Day to labor Day such as dill, parsley and watercress 1/2 teaspoon finely grad lemon peel 1/8 teaspoon hot pepper sauce 4 small soft-shell crabs, cleaned 1/4 cup unbleached all-purpose flour 1/4 teaspoon salt (optional) 1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 3 tablespoons butter or margarine 2 tablespoons peanut oil 2 to 4 lettuce leaves 2 round sandwich or hard rolls, halved In small bowl or mini-food-processor container, blend mayonnaise, herbs, lemon peel and hot pepper sauce; chill until time to serve. Quickly rinse crabs under cold running water; blot dry with paper towels. Using fork, pierce crabs in several places to allow steam to escape during cooking. In plastic or paper food-storage bag, combine flour, salt (if desired) and pepper; shake to mix. Add crabs; shake to coat well. Remove and shake off excess flour; In large skillet over medium-high heat, heat butter and oil until foam subsides. Saute crabs, turning with tongs, about 3 to 4 minutes on each side or until cooked through and rolls; top with crabs. Spoon herb mayonnaise on crabs or cut side of rolls; cover with top of roll. Makes 2 servings. Per serving: 848 calories, 39 grams protein, 56 grams fat, 44 grams carbohydrate, 655 milligrams sodium, 614 milligrams cholesterol. FRESH STRAWBERRY TART page 84 Fresh-fruit tarts are the dessert gems of summer, For variety, you can use any other lush, ripe, in-season fruit or berry, Crust: 1 cup unbleached all-purpose flour 1 tablespoon sugar 1/2 cup (1 stick) butter or margarine, cut into 8 pieces 2 to 3 tablespoons ice water Filling: 1/4 cup sugar 2 tablespoons cornstarch 1 cup milk 1 egg 1 teaspoon vanilla extract Glaze: 1/3 cup red currant jelly 1 tablespoon water 1-1/2 pints fresh, unblemished strawberries, stems removed, rinsed, blotted dry To make pastry: In mixing bowl, combine flour and sugar; using pastry cutter or 2 table knives, cut butter into flour until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. In small amounts, Remove; flatten slightly. Wrap in plastic wrap or waxed par; refrigerate 1 hour. Let dough stand at room temperature just until malleable. Heat oven to 350deg F. On lightly floured surface, roll out dough to form 10-inch circle. Roll dough onto rolling pin; carefully transfer to lightly greased 8-inch round tart pan with removable rim. Gently press dough into pan; trim, leaving overhang, Fold overhang in to form edge about 1/4 inch higher than pan rim. Prick pastry all over. Place in oven on lowest rack. Bake until golden brown, about 25 to 35 minutes (check periodically for bubbles; prick with wooden pick). Cool pastry completely in pan on wire rack. Meanwhile, prepare filling: In medium-size saucepan, mix sugar and cornstarch; stir in milk until smooth. Over medium heat, cook, constantly stirring, until mixture reaches boil and thickens; cook 1 more minute. In small bowl, using fork, heat egg; stir in small amount of hot-milk mixture slowly pour in egg mixture. Stir and cook just until thickened (do not boil); stir in vanilla. Cover and refrigerate until chilled, about 40 minutes. Meanwhile, prepare glaze: In small saucepan over low heat, stir jelly and water until jelly melts; set aside. Remove tart ring, leaving shell on base, or slide pastry onto serving dish. Spoon filling into shell; spread evenly. Beginning at outer edge and working toward center, arrange strawberries, stem end down, in filling. Carefully brush strawberries with glaze. Refrigerate to set glaze and store until time to serve or pack. Makes 1 8-inch tart, 6 to 8 servings. Per each of 8 servings; 317 calories, 4 grams protein, 15 grams fat, 41 grams carbohydrate, 164 milligrams sodium, 71 milligrams cholesterol. MEDITERRANEAN RICE SALAD 2 tablespoons olive oil 2 tablespoons cider vinegar 2 teaspoons chopped fresh basil leaves 1/4 teaspoon salt (optional) 4 teaspoon ground black pepper 1-1/2 cups cooked rice, cooled peeled, seeded, diced 1/2 small red onion, diced In medium-size bowl, whisk together oil, vinegar, basil, salt (if desired) and pepper. Add rice, tomato, cucumber and onion; toss to coat. Refrigerate until ready to serve or pack. Makes 3 servings. Per serving: 236 calories, 4 grams protein, 9 grams fat, 34 grams carbohydrate, 11 milligrams sodium, 0 milligrams cholesterol.
In 1990 it seemed as if Salt 'N' Pepa was on top of the world. The group's third album, black's Magic, had a slew of slammin' singles on it. "Expression" had been tabbed Top Rap Single of that ear by Billboard magazine. "Let's Talk About Sex" had been transformed into an AIDS-awareness anthem. And like their two previous platinum albums, Black's Magic had sold more than a million copies. To this day, Salt 'N' Pepa remains the only female rap act ever to go platinum. All of which meant this: Salt 'N' Pepa were dope, large, phat, fresh, the first and the foremost, the Queens of Rap, the Highnesses of Hip-Hop. And they were miserable. Miserable on the personal front: "I wasn't in the right frame of mind," recalls Sandi (Pepa) Denton, whose boyfriend left her that year while she was pregnant with their son, Tyran, who is now 4. "I always picturedn't happen that way for me, I was depressed." Miserable on the professional front: "People crook you -- that's what happened to us," says Dee Dee (Spinderella) Roper, as she describes the group's alleged mistreatment by their record company. "In their eyes, we were three little girls that had come from the street. You know: "They ain't got nothing -- give them crumbs and they'll be happy."" Miserable on all fronts: "Everything," sums up Cheryl (Salt) James, "was on the downside." What a difference four years make. Sandi, Cheryl and Dee have all had their own baby booms. Although it hasn't been easy, single-motherhood has been a big plus for all three. Sandi's son, Tyran, was followed in 1991 by Cheryl's daughter, Corin, who was followed by Dee Dee's daughter, Christenese, in 1992. Furthermore, they've all left their for the gratifying satisfying men in their lives. Salt 'N' Pepa's professional life is kickin' now -- even harder than their babies did. After what amounted to a three-year maternity leave, the trio bounced back with their extra-large Very Necessary album, the first release under their new deal with London Records. The ladies have also made some "very necessary" behind-the-scenes changes. "We were involved in every stage of this album from songwriting to production -- everything," says Sandi. It worked. Propelled by hits like "Shoop" and "Whatta Man" (featuring En Vogue), Very Necessary went double platinum within six months. So what does it mean? Clearly, Salt'N' Pepa's metamorphosis shows us that, if nothing else, life is about growth, forward motion, change. But when you look closer at their story, a far simpler truth emerges: Life is also about caring and sharing and having your buddy's back when she needs it. As corny be a testament to the power -- and the necessity -- of friendship. When you really put all the fame and fanfare aside, Salt N' Pepa are just three good girlfriends who knew one another back in the day. Who have been there for one another through pregnancies and failed love affairs. Through good times and bad. Sistahs. Homies. Girls. Women who have grown and are still growing. Women who, it seems, are an awful lot like us. "Women listen to our lyrics and take heed of them," says Sandi. "The fellas think we're sexy and cute and all that good stuff. But women listen to us. They take us seriously." We listen because, like many of us, Salt 'N' Pepa have been there. They've been taken advantage of at work and taken for granted at home. They've loved and they've lost. They know. You want to talk hurt, humiliation, heartache, depression,. Done it. Been there. And they've lived to rap about it. And it's a helluva tale. It began innocently enough when Sandi and Cheryl met at Queensborough Community College. Each took nursing courses. Each hung out in the cafeteria. End of similarities. Even then Sandi -- tall, solidly built and brown-skinned -- sported bleached-blonde hair and dressed like a punk rocker; Cheryl-short, slight and lighter-toned -- was sedate and far more conservative. "I guess when they say opposites attract, that's really true," says Sandi. "I'm kinda loud and outgoing, and Cheryl's more laid-back and calm. She used to watch me in the cafeteria, and I used to watch her, too. I was like," She's so quiet! "And then we just hooked up." Not long after, Cheryl helped Sandi land a part-time job at Sears with her, where they became best friends. Meanwhile another coworker at Sears -- Hurby (Luv Bug project he was doing. He convinced the duo to help out. When the project was finished, Azor played their song for his buddy Marley Marl, who, in turn, played it for some folks at Pop Art Records, who, in turn, made it into a record. That single, "The Showstoppa," earned Sandi and Cheryl a contract with Next Plateau Records. The year was 1986, and Salt 'N' Pepa were on their way. A year later, Dee Dee, their deejay, came on board. Lest we forget: Hip-hop in the eighties was -- as it still is -- a male-dominated genre, one where women rappers were routinely disregarded, dogged or dissed. Salt 'N' Pepa brought a whole new female flavor to the mix. With their sassy, sexy, bold, fun-loving, trash-talking, take-no-prisoners attitude, the group showed that they were women, damn it, and proud of it. They knew what women wanted to hear -- and sexually charged hits like "Tramp," "Push It," and "Let's Talk About Sex" sailed up the charts. On wax Salt 'N' Pepa were demanding their respect. Internally, however, there were problems. Basically, Azor, the group's manager and producer, wanted to run the show. Granted, he not only created Salt 'N' Pepa, but he also wrote and produced most of their early jams and led them down the path to platinum. In the early days he also told the women what to wear, whom they could associate with and how to act. And free spirit that she is, Sandi simply wasn't having it. What complicated matters more was the fact that Azor and Cheryl had become lovers -- which put a strain on Cheryl and Sandi's friendship. "It felt like a double team," Sandi recalls. "Since Hurby was her man, Cheryl would be more on his side during arguments than mine. I her man." Cheryl -- who grew up in Queens with her parents, elder brother and younger sisterbegan having white-picket-fence dreams of raising a family with Hurby. Then their personal relationship got shaky. And by the time he had had a son with another woman, Cheryl's dreams had flown out the window. In the summer of 1989, Cheryl moved in with Sandi. "We started to have fun again," recalls Sandi. "I was like," Girl, you don't need him. "That's when we would party. Now we do corny things like bowl and shoot pool and go to the movies and restaurants -- but back then it was a p-a-a-a-r-t-y!" Still every good-bye ain't gone -- particularly in Cheryl and Azor's case. Their personal relationship ended, but their business relationship remained. "For a while, it was really hard," she admits. "We were butting heads and really hating each other. But I found that if I held and hinder me and hold me down. We worked well together, and that was beneficial to me. I just learned how to forgive and forget. We're cool now." Unfortunately Sandi -- herself a Queens girl from a middle-class nuclear family (she has seven sisters and one brother) -- also imagined a Cosby-colored future for herself that wasn't to be. When she became pregnant in 1989, her ex (whom she declines to talk about) was "outta there." Instead she went to Lamaze classes and delivered her baby with Cheryl's help. Dee Dee was no luckier in love. Although New Jersey Nets guard Kenny Anderson was in the delivery room when she gave birth to their daughter, Christenese, he, too, was history a few weeks later. One of a family of five sisters and brothers, in retrospect the Brooklyn-born Dee Dee is philosophical about their relationship. "It was my fault, because half a woman will attract half a man," she says "self-esteem grows, you'll attract a whole man." Which is what Sandi, Cheryl and Dee Dee have done. "We try to school women on what type of men are out there, how to be strong and how to deal with them," Cheryl says. Cheryl met the soft-spoken Gavin Wray, a carpenter, at a club four years ago. Today the couple live together with their 3-year-old daughter, Corin. "He has the basic qualities in a man that, when you're young, you don't know how to look for," she says wryly. "He's always there for me. He's stable. He's a good friend to me and a good father. He spends a lot of time with his child. And he really loves and cares for me." Sandi met her honey, Treach (from Naughty by Nature), while both groups were doing a gig in Daytona Beach, Florida, three years back. Treach dared Sandi to shows. Sandi, a woman who used to drag-race down the streets of Queens just for kicks, immediately took up his offer. She and Treach have been falling for each other ever since. Onstage Treach is a posturing, somewhat menacing presence. But when he's hanging with his Sandi, words like courteous and attentive come to mind. At a delicatessen, Treach quickly rises to get Sandi a straw for her soda. Later as Treach and Sandi stroll down the street with their arms wrapped around each other, he stops at a street vendor to buy her two duffel bags. Why? Because when they'd passed the vendor earlier, Sandi said that she liked them. "He's the best person that I've even been with," she says. And for one of the few times in our conversation, homegirl is totally serious. Dee Dee's new love is Kermit Holmes, a basketball player with the Oklahoma City Cavalry in the Continental Basketball Association. When they met a little Dee Dee, it was like fate. "We just clicked spiritually. He's a "Whatta Man" because he's Godfearing That's what I love about him. "Not only have Salt 'N' Pepa rehauled their respective relationships, they've also gone through some business changes. In the late eighties, they'd bound themselves to contracts that, they claim, were hideously unfair. For instance, Next Plateau Records paid Azor's production company a reported $5 million in production costs over the years -- of which Salt'N' Pepa got half, to be divided three ways. Azor got the other half. Since entering into a new distribution deal with London Records U.S. and renegotiating their arrangement with Azor, things are finally looking up. "We had to lose to educate ourselves, but we feel much better now," says Dee Dee. "Ain't nobody gon na pull the wool over our eyes no more." They have also addressed their creative issues. Until Black's they were told in the studio. But as they grew as women, they demanded more control over their musical life. Initially, this, too, met with resistance, particularly from Azor. "He got our image together, and he really felt like he was the father and we were the kids," explains Sandi. "So when we started growing up and really wanted to do our thing, it was hard for him to let us go." Although Azor still works closely with them as the group's executive producer, he no longer controls every little thing they do. The group's fourth album, Very Necessary, is a testament to how Salt 'N' Pepa have spread their wings creatively. Because the trio thought one of their raps could use some kickin' background vocals to flesh it out, they took the initiative and called En Vogue. The result was their platinum "Whatta Man." When Sandi and Cheryl also decided that it was time for a playfully. The album's third single, "Heaven 'N Hell," however -- which speaks to the choices young people can make in their lives -- reveals the group's more serious, concerned side. Motherhood will do that to you. In fact, all three say that becoming a mother has rocked their worlds, in a positive sense. It certainly shocked their bodies. During their pregnancies, Sandi, Dee Dee and Cheryl put on 40, 25 and 5 pounds, respectively. To lose weight they all started watching their food intake and exercising religiously. Sandi has a do-it-yourself regimen: She stretches her calves using stacks of Yellow Pages and hoists a broom to tighten her arms. Dee Dee does crunches and is a Reebok step-aholic. And Cheryl, who can do 500 crunches at a time, is the most strident: She walks in the morning, runs on a treadmill and has her own weight room in her home. Thanks to the response their female fans have had to their new Pepa exercise video is in the works for Christmas release. Motherhood, though, is something they take more seriously than their crunches. "She filled something in me that I didn't have before," explains Dee Dee of daughter Christenese. "I think all three of us feel that way. We were so young -- partying, shaking our thing and "pushing it" all the time. But when you have a beautiful, precious baby, a new responsibility, you start to see things in a different light." And sometimes that light comes from above. "Everything we've been through, I guess, finally made us turn to the Lord," Cheryl says. "We're not perfect, and we're not gon na wake up one morning and be totally different people, but gradually we're learning and we're growing spiritually. I've never had so much peace in my life." Dee Dee adds, "We get together as much as we can and do it at night, we do it before meetings, we do it whenever we feel the urge." Reintroduced to the faith a few years back by their hairdresser and confidante Elena George, the trio also go to church when they can on Sundays. All right, cynics, here we go: How can someone who writhes and wriggles and "Shoops" it up Monday through Saturday be taken seriously when she puts on her church clothes and hums "Rock of Ages" on a Sunday? Answer: Don't worry about it. "People say you can't be a rapper and have God in your life," says Sandi. "Why can't I be who I am and love my God too?" Cheryl agrees. "When I go to church, sometimes I think people are going, 'I see her on videos in her little tight clothes and now she's in church praisin' the Lord!'" she explains. "But if you let that keep you to where you want to be. And I can't let those people and what they say keep me away from my God." Why not? Because life for Salt 'N' Pepa is all about growth, forward motion, change. Not about ties that bind, but ties that bond. It's about learning from their mistakes and living life on their own terms. It's about friendship. "We've learned how to deal with each other, and we respect each other," says Cheryl. "But what kept us together all this time, I think, is that we really love each other." Whatta group! Joy Duckett Cain is the parenting editor of this magazine.
In the aftermath of sexual assault. one woman finds the world an unsafe place and peace of mind just beyond reach // Rape divided my life into before and after. Little more than two years ago, I felt perfectly safe coming home to a dark, empty house, bounding up the stairs and stretching out on my bed. My home was my sanctuary. Then, on March 9,1994, an intruder burst into my bedroom and violated my body and my mind. So on a recent evening when I arrived home alone, I warily took the stairs one at a time pausing after each to look over my shoulder. I wanted to take a shower, but ruled it out because with the water running I wouldn't be able to hear the burglar alarm. To pass the time, I flipped through a magazine absentmindedly, dreading the coming darkness and listening for every rattle, car engine and footstep until my sister came home. That was a good day. It is frustrating to live in fear. And though each day is a little easier be afraid. It strikes when I least expect it, making it hard to do normal things like return a video, stop to get gas at night or park in a garage. And yet I'm realistic. I know it can happen to you or even to me again. There are nearly 1,900 rapes every day, according to the National Victim Center in Arlington, Virginia. I'm not the first and I won't be the last. I tell people about this fact-often through the Sexual Assault Response and Awareness Program (SARA), where I'm a volunteer in northern Virginiabecause it helps in my recovery. That's why I want to share my story here. The day leading up to the rape was unremarkable. I came home from work around seven in the evening and plopped down on the couch. I spent the evening talking on the telephone and watching TV. When my cousin, who was then my sole roommate, arrived home around 10:30, we watched TV together for an a night. There was nothing unusual about that, either, but I did notice my mood shift, and I sighed heavily. "What's wrong" my cousin asked. "I don't know," I told him. "I guess I'm just going to be depressed tonight." I didn't drift off to sleep until after midnight, expecting to awaken when my alarm went off at 6:30 in the morning. But it didn't happen that way. Around 2:30 I heard my bedroom door fly open. Groggy with sleep, I thought I was dreaming as I looked over my shoulder and saw a black, faceless shadow leap onto my bed. In a split second this creature was on my back. I tried to yell "No!" but before I could utter a word or even focus, he shoved a rag into my mouth and wrapped tape around my eyes and my wrists, binding them. I felt completely helpless, unable to see, talk or scream I couldn't fight for my life. I tried to murmur that someone else was in the house, but that only angered him. At various points, he threatened me by pressing a knife to my throat or rubbing a baseball bat against my temples. It was my worst nightmare come true. The floorboards creaked beneath his feet as he rummaged through my chest of drawers. Then I heard sounds of him stepping into the bathroom, followed by the distinctive pop of a Vaseline jar opening. That's when I knew what was about to happen. Coming back, the intruder worked silently, taping over the rag that was already in my mouth. I remember biting down so I wouldn't swallow it. Then he pulled off my pajama bottoms, flipped me onto my stomach and began to rub the Vaseline all over my buttocks. His zipper made a gritty, grinding sound that seemed to be amplified a thousand times. He sodomized me for what seemed like hours but was only about five minutes somehow detach myself from what was happening. I knew he was thrusting only because I felt the bed moving. Throughout the attack, I asked God one question over and over again: "Is it my time to go?" Finally I sensed that the answer was no, this was not my time to go. And that made me able to take what the rapist dished out. At one point he even tried to push the bat into me. After he finished, he went back into the bathroom. When he returned he tied my feet together and put me back under the covers as if he didn't want to hurt me. (It was then that he probably put his knife down, which the police found and later used to help identify him.) Placing my head on the pillow, he reached down and pulled the covers up to my neck. Then, as if he had changed his mind, he circled back in a rage, grabbed me, dragged me off head hit the toilet, and I acted as if I were out cold. He locked the door and was gone. I managed to peel the tape off, running in my pajama top down the fire escape just off from my room to a nearby convenience store. (I didn't run to my cousin's room because it's across the hall from mine, and I worried that the attacker might still be in the house.) At the store I called the police, and they came and took me to the hospital for the routine Police Evidence Recovery Kit (PERK) exam, which is ten times worse than any gynecological test. It involves combing pubic hairs as well as examining your entire body for evidence. Being poked and prodded is highly uncomfortable, especially after such an ordeal, but critical for the police investigation. After only a couple of weeks the investigator linked my rape to one of a similar nature in a nearby town. I was aware of that one because the victim. The boyfriend was the common denominator. He was the one. At first I thought he was incapable of such a crime. However, the evidence alone convinced me: He had also attempted to break in next door, and his fingerprints appeared on the neighbor's balcony. Police also positively identified his army knife (he was in the reserves) and a host of other elements too coincidental to be a fluke. Coming to grips with the fact that someone I knew had done this to me while subsequently losing my best friend-she tried to remain neutral, which I couldn't handle-has been harder to deal with than the actual crime. And the fallout continued: I cried every morning. I suffered from rape-trauma syndrome and had to take time off from work. I began losing my hair from the stress. My boyfriend and I quarreled because I made unreasonable demands for him to be there, even though he lived in another state. We broke up for a while, which, along with my I faced the prospect of losing my life as well, as I took the first in a series of HIV tests. I felt tremendous relief when the first one came back negative. Then I took another in four months and another two months later. All were negative, which was a gift from God. But even now I feel I should get another test, and I still live in terror that it will turn out positive. The most comforting outcome of this whole ordeal is that now, two years later, the man who raped me is in prison. After many continuances in court, I was spared the trauma of a trial because he pled guilty to both rapes. He was sentenced to 30 years for my case plus 36 years for the first one, and is eligible for parole in 2005-only nine years from now. Today I'm carving out a fragile sense of freedom and finding my niche as a 28-year-old African-American woman in the postcollege world. I am also a rape survivor. Black or female or a New Jersey native. Knowing that I made it through a life-or-death situation relying solely on my survival instincts has increased my sense of inner power. I don't give myself all the credit for my recovery, however. Support from family, friends and coworkers pushed me back to strength, as did the SARA program. One of its volunteers met me at the hospital and quickly became my best friend during those frightening first hours and later at the police station. The program guided me as I navigated the maze that is the court system, keeping me informed and actively involved throughout the process. Volunteers also provided me with free weekly counseling, which helped me to sort out what I was feeling and to make my own decisions on how to move forward. They helped me see that I could take control of my life. Going through the training to become a SARA volunteer also helped. People were astonished when I introduced myself at a meeting only seven months after I'd been handle adversity. It also means being pragmatic; now I know violence can strike at any time. I compare it to walking on a floor you've walked on a thousand times. Then one day you're walking across and it caves in and you fall through. You don't stop walking, but now you walk a little more cautiously, knowing you could fall through again. Recently I summoned the courage to spend an entire night alone in a different house, the one my cousin, sister and I moved to. Just the idea of being home overnight by myself had frightened me for the longest time. But that night it was only me. The next morning I awoke with a great sense of accomplishment. Another small hurdle. Another good day. Author Affiliation Marcia Caster is a freelance writer and co-owner of an image-consulting company in northern Virginia. //
Survive Your Family During the Holidays-for Real! A visit home with your family can be like a Christmas tree. It's festive and inviting for a while, but after several days you may be walking on pins and needles. Unlike a tree, however, you can't throw your relatives out into the street when you're tired of their mess. So, seriously, what can you do? Three experts in family therapy-Jeree Wade, M.A., Marlene F. Watson, Ph.D., and Gwendolyn Goldsby Grant, Ed.D. -share their hints for avoiding those holiday hassles: TAKE THE AGONY OUT OF THE INQUISITION Those "well-meaning" questions can make you feel as if you're facing a family firing squad. To fend off their attacks: Realize it's their opinion, but it's your life. So what if you don't fit their vision of how to live? Why should you? "The point is not to internalize that there is something wrong with you," says Watson. Understand the motivation behind the message. Interrogators' con- CONTINUED ON appearance may be motivated by their own fears or even painful past experiences. "Some relatives want to point out what they think are your foibles, so they can feel better about themselves," says Grant. Cut them off at the pass. "Put the onus back on the questioner," says Grant. Keep it light. Laugh and say, "Well, this time I actually got in the door and took my coat off before you asked me who I'm seeing, Aunt Helen. What took you so long?" If humor doesn't work, you could always change the subject by saying "Let's keep the peace and not go there." Plan an escape. Have a signal with an ally (your husband or sister, for example) when you need to be "rescued" or when it's time to go. You can get out of the situation by taking a walk together or clearing dishes. Discourage Dysfunctional Drama To deal with relatives who are acting worse way to get it. Often the relative who behaves outrageously is crying out for love or understanding. Encourage him to share what's in his heart, or simply offer a warm embrace. He'll feel less needy and less compelled to start with the histrionics. Don't overreact. Criticizing, making apologies for the person's actions or otherwise calling extra attention to it may make a tense situation even more uncomfortable. What's more, "an audience may only egg them on," says Grant. Confront the culprit-alone. Consider sharing with your relative at a later time, and in private, how you feel when such situations erupt. Urge her to seek professional help if her actions are selfdestructive. If it's a repeat performance, speaking to her ahead of your family gathering may head off further trouble. Avoid a Rift Over Gifts Sure, it's the thought that counts, but "What the heck were you thinking?" is not what a giver wants to hear. To put a price tag on love. You should feel valued by your man every day, not just on December 25. If your lover doesn't give you a gift or gives you something that obviously required very little thought, don't be surprised, says Watson. If he wasn't a giver before, he won't be one now. Also, she adds, "Don't expect that giving him an expensive gift will elevate your value in his eyes. A gift will not make a relationship more than it already is." Know what to expect. To prevent any disappointments, consider discussing presents up front and assigning a dollar value. Avoid waste and bad taste. Make an effort to know the tastes of the recipient. (See Intimacies on page 50 for more tips on holiday giving and receiving.) Spend within your budget. If your family is large and your budget small, consider drawing names out of a basket so that each member buys one gift. Squelch Family Squabbles hurts and unresolved resentments along with them. To avoid turn- CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE ing your living room into The People's Court: Seek healing before the holidays arrive. "Consider seeking therapy about a month before you go home," advises Grant. Stay in the here and now. "Don't bring events from 15 years ago with you," suggests Wade. To help maintain emotional control, remind everyone that these gatherings are for good times, not for airing grievances. Schedule a family conference. Ideally it should be before, or after, the festivities. Set ground rules. If the holiday visit is the only time those in conflict can meet and talk, set aside perhaps one hour per day to do so, advises Watson. Encourage listening without judgment. Let one person speak without interruption. The second person should repeat what he heard to make sure the speaker has been understood-but not to agree or disagree. If his position is clear, then it's the other party's Come back to the issue, ideally a day later. Share how you'd like to relate to each other going forward and what you'd like to see happen, regardless of what happened before. Put the past behind you. Consider a ritual to put closure on previous hurt. Each of you might write down resentments and burn them together in an ashtray or the fireplace. Handle Secrets With Care Holidays are often the time when revelations do the most damage. A secret is seeking a detonator to trigger a destructive family blowup. The experts advise: Ask yourself what the benefit of telling the secret is. "What is your motivation in revealing it?" says Grant. Be sensitive to others' privacy, to their welfare and to timing. Refuse to be in charge of secrets. Watson warns, "If you are asked to keep a grave secret, be honest and tell the person that it is a burden for you. Encourage her to confide in a minister, counselor or be held hostage by the whim of others." -S.L.
Looking fabulous is a family affair // The modern-day approach to dressing mother and child leaves the playing field wide open for personal expression, whether your style is classic, trendy, culturally connected or somewhere in between. For the mom: If your tastes lean toward the traditional, opt for streamlined silhouettes tweaked with updated details, Dresses, like this halter style by Liz Lange Maternity, $185, allow you to look stylish in one step. The cotton-blend dress is versatile enough to be worn alone or under a jacket or cardigan when the weather cools. Necklace and earrings, Mikimoto. Slides, Casadei. Bag, Buzz by Jane Fox. For the bouncing baby boy: Preppy chic has trickled down to the toddler set. But unlike most passing fads, knit looks-like this cotton cardigan, $36, top, $16, and shortalls, $22, by Malina for Natialie and Friends-never go out of style. Beauty note: Pamper yourself before and after the blessed event with beauty products designed specifically for pregnant moms. Try Mustela's 9 Months skincare line, cream and Specific Support Bust cream. For details, see Shop. For the mom-to-be: If you pride yourself on being in tune with the trends, many selections now have of-the-moment appeal. Case in point: the sexy sequined stretch tank by Two Guys and a Girl for A Pea in the Pod, $155, and pearlized leather pants, A Pea in the Pod, $295, shown here. Earrings, Sibilia. Slides, Rebecca Sanver. Photograph Photograph Photograph // For the little princess: Like mother, like daughter is what admirers will say when they see your child decked out in this stylish silk-knit dress, $56, and cardigan, $39, both by Malina for Natalie and Friends. Beauty note: Express motherly love with baby-care products that are safe, mild and natural from the Davies Babies line, which includes a Baby Massage Gel, Diaper Rash Protection Cream and Baby Balm. For details, see Shop. For the expectant mom: There are no hard and fast rules when dressing for by Montgomery New York, $375, technically isn't maternity wear, but the drapey material lets you interpret it as you wish. Another bright idea: a top with ruching, like this stretch camisole by A Pea in the Pod, $95, that expands as you do. Fringed metallic wrap, Bisou Bisou by Michele Bohbot. Slides, Island Pride. Photograph Photograph // For the boy wonder: Playful prints, like this cotton sheeting shirt by Baby Guess, $42, are one fashionable way to let baby cut loose. Cotton canvas shorts, $38, Baby Guess. Beauty note: Bust-firming products counter stretch marks and sagging resulting from pregnancy. Try Darphin's Bust Profile Firming gel. For details, see Shop. Photograph //
THE ESSENCE TOTAL HEALTH CHALLENGE PART TWO Headnote Weight-loss secrets that really work, from sisters who swear by them // Let's face it. Losing weight takes effort. But with a sensible plan that includes reducing calories and fat, controlling food portions and exercising regularly, the weight will come off slowly but surely. Need proof? These four sisters, ESSENCE readers just like you, have lost weight and kept it off for five years or more. Here are some secrets to their success. Cut Calories When Sandy Young, 34, a middle-school teacher and part-time graduate student from Louisiana, moved to Houston for a teaching job, her weight shot up to 212 pounds. Young, who at only five feet two inches tall wore a size 18, says concern about her family history of diabetes and high blood pressure motivated her to slim down. She began walking for 30 minutes a day and lifting weights a few times a week. She changed her eating habits, eliminating fast foods, fried foods, sodas, chips, candy and condiments. Photograph Young replaced high-fat foods with leaner options. "I switched to skim milk and ate turkey sausage instead of pork," she says. Today, six years after shedding 87 pounds in 11 months, Young says she has no intention of letting her busy lifestyle cause her to put the weight back on. "I make sure to schedule time to exercise-even if that means getting up at four in the morning," Young declares. "It's worth it to me." Get Photograph After Before // Moving Being heavy never bothered Gayle Weston. Even when she was carrying 260 pounds on her five-foot four-inch frame, weight loss was not a priority. "When I broke my ankle in 1992, my doctor advised me to lose 100 pounds so I'd be able to walk with less pain after it healed. It was only then that I realized how I was jeopardizing my health," says Weston, a 35-year-old forklift operator from Memphis. She joined a gym but could barely huff and puff was determined to stick with it, walking for a few seconds, then a little bit longer with each session. She cut out fried foods and slashed her portion sizes. "It took months to really see the change in my body," Weston says. "But I kept thinking that if all those other people in the gym could do it, so could L" The pounds began to drop as her endurance increased. It wasn't long before Weston's walk became a jog, and then a run. Now, a svelte 148 pounds, she works out six days a week and completed her second half marathon last November. And Weston is looking for more ways to keep up the good work: "This year I'm adding yoga or karate to my routine." > Pump Iron There is evidence that weight lifting may have an even more lasting effect on metabolism than aerobic exercise. According to researchers at Arizona State University, resistance training boosts metabolism and helps you burn calories for 39-year-old crisis counselor in Virginia, credits lifting with her 32-pound weight loss. "When my mother lost her struggle with diabetes and a heart condition, I knew I had to drop some weight or I would end up the same way," Moss says. Though she had been biking or walking five days a week, she wasn't losing as much weight as she had hoped. Her doctor recommended weight training to give her a boost. "As soon as I got into the gym and started lifting weights, I began to see my curves coming back," Moss says. Five years later she's still pumping iron. "I started by exercising five days, but I loved it so much that now I work out seven days a week," she says. "It's part of my life, like brushing my teeth." And Moss has another reason for her dedication to good health. "When I take care of myself," she says, "it's like who lose weight and keep it off say that monitoring their progress-whether by weighing themselves or by noting their dress size-keeps them on track." "At first I was all about the scale," Young admits. "Later I didn't even care about the number, I just went by the way my clothes felt." // THE HEALTHY WOMAN'S PANTRY Just because you're trying to eat more wholesome foods doesn't mean you have to give up treats forever Katherine Tallmadge, a registered dietician and spokeswoman for the American Dietetic Association and author of Diet Simple (LifeLine Press), offers these tips on the smart way to satisfy a craving. Photograph After Before Photograph Before After // And if your jeans do start to feel a bit tighter, take a tip from Sheila Robinson, 33, a police officer in Chicago. "I try to watch my intake of cakes and pies, because those are my weaknesses," she says. "But if I do indulge, I simply run a little her daily workout is nothing for Robinson now-she ran her sixth marathon in October-but exercise was not always so easy for this former 235-pound woman." "When I failed the police academy's physical-fitness entrance exam for the second time, I decided that my life had to change," she says. She started walking, then running. She also became a vegetarian. "I focused on getting five servings a day of fruits and veggies and ate soy burgers," Robinson says. "I can honestly say I have never missed the meat. "Ten years later and 85 pounds lighter, she now teaches police recruits how to stick with a weight-loss program." "I tell them to set very small goals," she says. "Just say to yourself, Today I am going to leave a little food on my plate or Today I am going to walk the dog an extra block or two. You simply need to know that you can change your health. You don't have to suffer from CALORIES The most seemingly innocent foods can be a nutritional minefield, according to Michele Trankina, Ph.D., a professor of biological sciences at St. Mary's University in San Antonio. Her take on the hidden calories in five favorites: SALAD DRESSING 140 calories Two tablespoons of mayonnaise -- based dressings like ranch or Russian contains 140 calories and a whopping 14 grams of fat. To keep your salads healthful, top them with a small amount of oil and balsamic vinegar, or a mix of lemon juice, garlic, vinegar and olive oil. If you must have a creamy dressing, order it on the side and use sparingly. Photograph That Coconut Creme Frappuccino you had with breakfast is the caloric equivalent of a steak-with dessert. // TACO SALAD 1,100 calories A taco salad ordered at a fastfood restaurant (with ground beef, refried beans, lettuce, tomato, sour cream and guacamole) can contain up to 1,100 calories. The edible shell has the dietary value of pork rinds. Instead, replace the beef with dressing. And don't eat the shell. COFFEE DRINK 870 calories Some of these beverages have the caloric equivalent of a whole meal. For example, a Dunkin' Donuts Hazelnut Coffee Coolatta with cream contains 370 calories, and a Starbucks Chocolate Brownie Frappuccino has 490 calories. The largest Starbucks Coconut Creme Frappuccino weighs in at 870 calories and 32 grams of fat. A better coffee option would be a skim latte or iced coffee with skim milk. BAKED POTATO 620 calories A plain spud is a healthier alternative (212 calories and 5 grams of fiber with the skin) than fries. But a baked potato the way most of us order it-topped with bacon, butter, sour cream and/or cheddar cheese-can pack 620 calories and 31 grams of fat. A preferable option is with one tablespoon of butter, which has 160 calories. JUICE 110 calories Fruit juices may be loaded with vitamins, but they're not calorie-free. For example, eight ounces of orange juice contain 110 calories, and a glass of apple to eat fruit instead of drinking fruit juices. That way you get the fiber without the excess sugar. Or, if you must have juice, cut down on the calories by mixing one part seltzer with one part juice. Photograph A Chinese feast, and only 367 calories. // FAST FOOD THE RIGHT WAY Grabbing lunch at a drive-through restaurant or having dinner at a southern-style or Chinese buffet has the potential to wreck even the most diligent dieter's resolve, says Cathy Nonas, a dietitian in New York and author of Outwit Your Weight (Rodale Press). But remember, you don't have to pile on the food (and the calories and the pounds); you have the power to choose the healthier offerings. Consider these suggestions: //
Should we medicate our kids to change their behavior? Photograph // Linda Brooks had tried to deal with her daughter Laura's erratic behavior in a way that didn't involve medication, but she was running out of options. Laura, 11, was always "acting out," Brooks says, jumping out of her seat in class, interrupting teachers, not finishing assignments. She'd had similar problems at other schools-the one she currently attends is her sixth since pre-K. At home she would talk back constantly and butt in on grown folks' conversations. Her room was a disaster area, and when Mom said to clean it, "she'd shove everything under the bed and into drawers and the closet." So last December, after years of resistance, Brooks, who is a single mom and works as a FedEx carrier in Houston, agreed to put her bright, spirited daughter on medication. Laura has started taking Adderall, a stimulant, for symptoms of **31;2340;TOOLONG disorder, or ADHD. (Stimulants increase brain activity, increasing alertness and medication, Brooks says, her behavior has done a 180-degree turn. She finishes assignments, stays in her seat, and follows directions. She's gone from D's to B's and straight E's-for excellent-in conduct. At home she minds her mother and cleans her room. With estimates that between 3 percent and 5 percent of children nationwide-about 2 million-have ADHD, one of the most common mental-health diagnoses among children today, stories like Laura's are not unusual. Among Black parents, though, suspicions of bias and fear of stigma exacerbate an already complicated situation. Although the estimated rates of ADHD are the same for Black children as for children nationwide, experts say a distrust of pharmaceuticals and the medical profession often makes us leery of medicating our children when behavior issues arise. Of course, part of the problem is an educational system that expects children to stay still for 45 minutes at a time and comply rather than challenge. "Most kids don't need medication," says Jawanza Kunjufu, an education African American Images). "Boys need to be at the front of the class, where they can focus. They need lesson plans that embrace their culture. They need movement and physical education put back into the curriculum." But until we retool our schools, parents must try to fit their children into the existing systems. Dan Johnson, for one, is trying everything he can to keep his smart, energetic son, Christian, now 8, off "the stuff," as he calls it. Like Laura, Christian has struggled at school and at home. After he was expelled from school, he was diagnosed with ADHD and meds were recommended. Johnson, a business and church consultant in Chicago, reluctantly agreed to allow Christian, then 5, to try a prescribed stimulant. His behavior improved, but Johnson, who says he grew up seeing how illicit drugs affected some of his close family members, remained skeptical. So when Christian cried out one day in class that he his dad discontinued the drug and switched him to an herbal supplement (see sidebar, next page). Though tolerable, Christian's behavior was less consistent after the change. Photograph // So who's right? Must our kids be medicated to succeed? AHEATEDDEBATE Using prescription drugs to reduce inappropriate behavior in children has certainly become more acceptable. Research shows a surge in the last 15 years in the number of children taking powerful medications like Ritalin. Sales of methylphenidates, like Ritalin, classified by the federal Drug Enforcement Administration as controlled substances because of their addictive potential, increased nearly 500 percent froml991 to 1999. Sales of amphetamines like Adderall rose more than 2,000 percent in that time. Still, some experts argue that children are often labeled ADHD when other problems exist. Some even deny that such a "disorder" exists. One study suggested that "agitation syndrome," or environmental stress, not attention deficit, may be affecting adolescent Black boys. Meanwhile, the National Medical Association, a group of the rise in hyperactivity-disorder diagnoses has led to disproportionate numbers of Black children in special education. Blacks make up 12 percent of the population but 28 percent of special-ed students. While many African-Americans believe our kids are misdiagnosed with ADHD, the reality, mental-health practitioners say, is that many Black children lack access to proper screening by adequately trained health professionals. The result: Our children are vilified and criminalized for behavior that, when exhibited by White children, prompts calls for treatment and support. "While their White counterparts are seen as having mental-health needs, Black children are seen as acting up and labeled bad," says Annelle B. Primm, M.D., M.P.H., an associate professor of psychiatry at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Primm says we can't begin to address the problem until we first overcome our own biases. "We need to shift the discussion from concern over our children being drugged to how our children are being treated," she says. "Let's be sure our kids get the of the juvenile justice system, because you know what that means for our community." MOVING BEYOND THE STIGMA If your child has behavior issues in school and you're not sure why, take steps to discover the root causes and get help: Ask questions. If the teacher complains that your child consistently has trouble focusing and has a hard time sitting still, find out why. Get a complete educational, psychological and neuropsychological evaluation done by a trained mental-health professional, particularly one who understands our culture. Mental-health practitioners are more likely to run the full battery of evaluations to make their assessments. Prices vary, and insurance may not cover the cost, so it's best to shop around. Ask your pediatrician for a referral, or identify a local mental-health-care clinic. Know your rights. A teacher can't "diagnose" a child, but she can share her observations with the child's evaluator. Also understand that in most states it's not illegal for a school to require a student to even say that they are "not equipped" to teach certain children. (If this happens to you, contact the Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates copaa.org for help.) Consider alternative approaches. If your child is diagnosed with ADHD, be aware that you have options. Studies show that a combination of drugs and therapy works better than drugs alone or therapy alone. In behavior therapy, children learn strategies to help them focus, control their behavior, and respond appropriately when they're frustrated or anxious. Many doctors also recommend exercise and changes in diet and lifestyle, as some research has linked food allergies and excessive television watching to the disorder. Can ADHD Be Treated Holistically? While many medical professionals offer prescription drugs as a first choice to address ADHD symptoms, other alternatives exist: HERBAL REMEDIES These supplements are not approved by the government, but some parents, like Dan Johnson, swear by them. He is a firm believer in Focus Attention, which contains the herbs ginkgo biloba and DMAE's son, Christian, still has regular sessions with his psychiatrist, Karen Taylor-Crawford, M.D., director of the Disruptive Behavior Disorder Clinic at the University of Illinois Department of Psychiatry, focusing on behavior therapy. (Be sure to get a doctor's approval before giving children supplements.) IMPROVED DIET Beverly Nicholson, Ph.D., an herbalist who runs the Herbal Connection Holistic Health Spa in Chicago, suggests that parents eliminate sugar and dairy from diets, consistently use multivitamins and herbal supplements, and think of medication as a last resort. The natural approach takes dedication and commitment, she warns: "Parents need to reassess their own lifestyle. You can't change your child's habits without changing your own." Where to Go for Help The following resources can help you understand your child's needs: BOOKS Delivered from Distraction: Getting the Most out of Life With Attention Deficit Disorder (BaIlantine) by Edward M. Hallowell, M.D., and John J. Ratey, M.D. Straight Talk About Psychiatric Medications for Kids (Chadd.org-Children and Adults With **30;2373;TOOLONG Disorder (CHADD), which has chapters nationwide, offers resources, support and advocacy; (301) 306-7070. Ldanatl.org-Learning Disabilities Association of America (LDA) is an international organization for children and adults with learning disabilities; (412) 341-1515. Allkindsofminds.com-All Kinds of Minds offers information and resources on learning differences; cofounded by MeI Levine, M.D., a leading expert in development and learning. Nimh.nih.gov-National Institutes of Mental Health is the federal research agency for mental and behavioral disorders. NIMH's Web site has an extensive ADH D section. REFERRALS Association of Black Psychologists lists psychologists by state; (202) 722-0808; abpsi.org. American Psychiatric Association, a national organization of psychiatrists, has a listing of district branches and state associations; (703) 907-7300; psych.org. Sidebar About 2 million children have been diagnosed with ADHD Sidebar Defining Behavioral Disorders Unsure of the difference between ADHD1ADD, ODD and CD? This guide will help: * 1ADHD and ADD are often used interchangeably, although features of ADHD include distractability, impulsivity and hyperactivity. Some studies indicate that boys are diagnosed with ADHD more often than girls by a ratio of 10 to 1. * 1DD, opposition defiant disorder, refers to a child who is often defiant, stubborn, noncompliant or belligerent. Some children are diagnosed as having ADHD and ODD. * 1D, conduct disorder, is defined as a serious pattern of antisocial behavior, such as fighting, bullying, lying or stealing. A troubling trend, notes Annelle B. Primm, M.D., of Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, is the growing popularity of this diagnosis for Black children. "Conduct disorder is usually indicative of something else the clinician should look for," she says. If your child is diagnosed as having CD, get a second opinion to rule out any other possible psychiatric causes such as depression. Sidebar Bkcks make up 12% of the population, but 28% ofspecial-ed students Sidebar ADHD DRUGS: A Parent's Guide Here are common pharmacological drugs used to STIMULANTS Common brands: Ritalin, Concerta, Adderall, Cylert How they work: Increase brain activity, resulting in alertness and attention. What to know: Side effects may include decreased appetite, insomnia, headaches and mood changes. Ritalin has been linked to depression; Cylert has been linked to liver failure; and in February Canada suspended sales of Adderall XR after reports of sudden unexplained deaths of 20 U.S. children and adults who were taking the medication. NONSTIMULANT Common brand: Strattera How it works: Increases access to a brain chemical thought to regulate impulse control and attention. What to know: It's not an PDA-controlled substance. Takes longer to start working, compared with stimulants. Side effects may include upset stomach, decreased appetite, dizziness, fatigue, mood swings. Long-term risks are unclear. ANTIDEPRESSANTS Common brands: Wellbutrin, Effexor; tricyclic antidepressants: Pamelor, Tofranil How they work: Change levels of brain chemicals; depending on the drugs, regulate mood, relieve tension or anxiety. What to both ADHD and depression. Side effects may include weight loss, dizziness. The FDA has asked manufacturers to include warning labels alerting healthcare providers to an increased risk of suicidal thinking in children and adolescents being treated with these agents. Sidebar Studies show that a combination of drugs and therapy works better than drugs alone Author Affiliation Robin D. Stone is a frequent contributor to ESSENCE. //
CEOS are paid a lot to face facts, however unpleasant, so it's time they faced this one: The issue of their pay has finally landed on the national agenda and won't be leaving soon. It is now inevitable that someone will do something about it, and one of the fiercer dramas of the next several months will feature Congress, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the accounting profession, and the CEOs themselves battling over who that someone will be. The fight has already begun. Anyone can tell you what the problem is. Just ask your neighbor or cabdriver -- then stand back. Largely unharnessed from corporate performance, the pay of America's CEOs has been galloping forward faster than the average production worker's pay, faster than corporate profits, industrial production, the national debt, the population of India, channels on cable TV, or just about anything else on earth but the number of newly independent republics. The CEOs of 282 large and medium-size U.S. industrial companies studied by the Hay Group consulting firm earned, on average, 30 largest, some $3.2 million. Maybe if the economy were thriving and big employers were hiring, no one would care. Maybe if President Bush hadn't taken the auto company CEOs to Japan to meet their lower-paid, more sucessful competitors, or if consumer confidence weren't in the tank, or if giant companies weren't still announcing vast layooffs, CEO pay wouldn't be on the front pages. But all those things have happened, making Americans deeply, bitterly mad and creating an issue no poliitician can resist. When a conservative like Dan Quayle rails against "those exorbitant salaries paid to corporate executives unrelated to productivity," something's up. The issue should only get hotter as proxy statements detailing executives' 1991 compensation go out to shareholders in the next few weeks, about the same time as several of the most important primary elections. The Securities and Exchange Commission, among the first to act, recently reversed its longstanding practice by allowing shareholders a nonbinding vote on corporate pay policies. The proxy statements, and Washington could go still further. SEC Chairman Richard Breeden says, "God only help us if the government gets in the business of trying to regulate compensation. It is the board of directors' job, and I would warmly and strongly recommend them to please do it -- because if they do not, then someone will call on us to do it." Who's to blame for all this? That's easy: CEOs. A pedant might insist that boards of directors are the culprits, since they set top executives' compensation. But in practice most CEOs appoint thier own directors, presenting only their nominees to the shareholders for a vote. Beside, 63% of all directors are CEOs. Face it, fellas: You got yourselves into this mess. Now it's time to get yourselves out. Fixing CEO pay is a two-level challenge. Level one is devising a pay plan that works; many innovative companies -- Georgia-Pacific, Avon Products, Becton Dickinson, and several performance. Level two -- much harder to reach -- is getting boards of directors to adopt those smart pay plans instead of the stupid ones they so often favor. The bedrock principle of paying the chief is aligning his interests with the shareholders ''. Sounds simple enough. But the favorite instrument for doing that over the past 40 years, the beloved stock option, turns out to be full of problems. That fact guarantees conflict ahead, because options have been the main engine powering the hypergrowth of CEO pay since the Eighties. In 1985 the typical CEO of a fair-size American industrial received long-term incentives, mainly options, with an estimated value of $58,000. Last year it was over $527,000. Base salary, bonus, perks, benefits -- each figures in, but not like options. They are the form of compensation getting the closest scrutiny from Congress, the SEC, and the accounting profession. A standard option gives an executive the right but not the obligation to buy company shares for ten years granted, though usually he must wait two to four years before he may exercise them. The incentive seems straightforward: The executive will work like mad to maximize his wealth by raising the stock price, and shareholders get the benefit. Trouble is, it doesn't work very well. Options can be employed intelligently and effectively. But because they have built-in flaws and are often abused, their record of linking executives' interests with shareholders' is far from good. One reason is that the optionee doesn't put up any money. For most ordinary investors, the fear of loss is at least as strong a motivator as the hope for gain, but recipients of options face no risk. If the stock rises, terrific; if it falls, they simply discard the worthless things. As compensation consultant James F. Carey puts it, "From the participant's viewpoint, the option grant may seem like a no-risk wager in a game of craps called "the market."" The CEO with information. Knowing the company's prospects more intimately than anyone, he has a far better chance of choosing a peak in the stock price to exercise options and take his profit. There's nothing illegal ahout this. That's just the way it is. And that is how options work when companies play fair. Many play otherwise. Suppose a company issues options to a CEO when the stock is at $50, and it then falls to $30. You might think it's only right for the optionee to be out of the money in that case, but some compensation committees instead take pity on him. They cancel those options and replace them with new ones at $30. America's champion option repricer is Apple Computer. "They're worldclass," says Ralph Whitworth, president of the Washington shareholder rights group United Shareholders Association, with bitter admiration. Apple has repriced executive stock options six times since 1981, with two repricings affecting options held by CEO John Sculley. As a result, he with the stock earned a dime. Venture capitalist Peter O. Crisp, chairman of the compensation committee of Apple's board, won't comment on the repricings. The bottom line is that when compensation expert Graef S. Crystal examined the option gains of 281 CEOs vs. the performance of their companies' stocks in the 1980s, he found scant correlation. Chief executives could often wring substantial option gains out of shares with merely middling long-term performance. In short: Options on average do not put CEOs in the same boat as shareholders, or even in the same body of water. So why do boards of directors award them in such superabundance? Mostly for a few reasons, none of them good but all of them powerful. One is the near-magical way options are treated in a company's financial statements. Pay a CEO in cash, and that money becomes an expense that reduces profits. But give him a stock option, even a mammoth option that may one day pay him tens of millions, and under 1 cent as a result. On the corporate income tax return, however, options do have an effect: They eventually create a deduction if they turn out to be worth something. When an employee exercises his options, tax rules recognize that his gain is value the company has given away -- after all, it could have kept those shares and sold them later at a higher price -- so it is tax deductible. Another extraordinary feature of options is that their value is almost never fully reported to shareholders. Stock options most assuredly have value, even though any option's precise payoff is uncertain until it is exercised. A company's annual proxy statement reports top-executive option grants but gives no hint of what those options might someday be worth -- a value that can be estimated through several techniques. Yes, the proxy will also report the CEO's gain when he exercises options, but only if he is still an officer. Consider a few related facts: Most options are good for ten years;; most options can be exercised for three years or more after an optionee retires. Shareholders never know about most of a CEO's option profits because he takes them after he is no longer an officer. Now imagine you're a corporate director when profits are under pressure and CEO pay is a bare-wire issue. At the February board meeting do you vote the CEO an extra million dollars in salary and bonus, which will reduce profits and increase his compensation as reported in the proxy statement? Or do you give him options that are worth perhaps two or three times that much, will not affect profits, may reduce the company's taxes later, and will not show up as a dollar amount in the proxy? This may be where the phrase "no brainer" originated. All in favor say aye! If the financial treatment of stock options seems crazy to you, you're not alone. The SEC, Congress, and the rulemakers of accounting have all recently begun considering changes that would wipe are steaming. At the top levels of giant companies, meddling with the boss's pay is known as "playing with the sheriff's daughter." SEC Chairman Breeden has directed his chief accountant to report by mid-June on ways companies might be required to calculate a dollar value for option grants, which would be reported in proxy statements. Some of these valuation methods make your temples throb, but a rough rule of thumb for ordinary ten-year options is to take the grant's face value -- number of shares times exercise price -- and divide by three. Senator Carl Levin (D-Michigan) has introduced a bill that would, among other things, make companies value option grants and reduce reported profits when they award them, just as when they award other forms of compensation. Much more significantly, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which sets accounting rules, has just shoved to the front burner a long-simmering project on the treatment of options. If the board concludes -- as it well may, and should -- CEO pay could be enormous. The directors' no-brainer isn't so simple anymore. Financially, options are the one big freebie in the world of pay, since you can award all you like and never reduce reported earnings. But if the accountants start charging for them, you can be certain companies won't use them as much. It is even conceivable that some CEOs' pay could go down. If you think CEOs don't worry much about this technical accounting stuff, consider what happened the last time FASB tried to tackle the issue of options, in the mid-1980s. It never even got a chance to write a proposed rule. Scores of high-powered CEOs -- "not the people who normally wrtie in on accounting matters," recalls a former board member -- came down like a ton of bricks with strongly worded letters, many not bothering to give reasons, according to people who have read them. The simple message: Drop it. FASB tabled the matter for four years in favor of? "The forces of opposition have not quite been marshaled yet," said FASB Chairman Dennis Beresford on the day the board stepped into the ring for Round Two. "But they will be." And where will these forces come from? One place to look is the Business Roundtable, the club of CEOs from 200 of America's largest companies. It has been feuding with FASB for years and lost no time staking out a position on this issue. Executive stock options, it believes, are just about the greatest thing for America since microwave popcorn. In a statement so audacious it makes one's head swim, the Roundtable claims that the bull market of the 1980s is proof that stock options work. Options did multiply enormously in those years, but most compensation consultants say cause and effect were just the opposite: Boards saw the market taking off and jumped to ladle out more options. The whole imbroglio is a shame, because options, for all their problems, can be useful incentives to demand real performance from a CEO can, for example, index the option's exercise price to some target return they want to beat the stock market's, an industry group's, or the rate on Treasury bills, for example. Becton Dickinson, the New Jersey medical technology company, did that last year when it adopted a plan that sets executive option prices for the next four years according to the performance of the S &P; 500. The board grants options each May, and if the S &P; has outperformed the stock since the last grant, then the exercise price of new options is set higher than the actual share price. That will give CEO Raymond V. Gilmartin and his top officers a windfall if Becton stock has beaten the S &P; but will leave them struggling to catch up if it has fallen behind. That element of risk tied to the stock's performance is key to effective CEO pay, say most compensation consultants. A little imagination can find all sorts of ways to create is to set an option's exercise price way above the market and then just sit back and watch the CEO try to beat it. The best example is the 1.8-million-share option granted to Time Warner co-CEO Steven J. Ross two years ago at $150 a share when the stock was at $118. The grant could still earn him a vast sum, but with the stock currently around $105, Graef S. Crystal calculates there's about a 40% chance it will never earn him a thing. Another effective way to add risk is to substitute some form of stock compensation for cash. That's still unusual; the story of CEO pay over the past few decades is a tale of clever but riskless incentive plans piled ever higher as consultants thought them up. Each one, intended to motivate the CEO afresh, simply tossed him another no-lose way to make a bundle. But taking away old-fashioned cash and putting some form of risky stock in its place -- that focuses the mind. Avon has just done this in a out any day now. CEO James Preston, working with Goodyear CEO Stanley C. Gault, who is chairman of Avon's compensation committee, came up with a plan that freezes Preston's base salary for the rest of his career -- he'll be 65 in seven years -- at $610,000 annually. His target bonus had been 65% of that but is now reduced to 50%. In return for giving up seven years of raises, which at a modest 10% annually would have lifted his salary to nearly $1.1 million by retirement, plus giving up part of his bonus, he gets a one-time grant of options on 50,000 shares. Because Preston's salary is frozen, those options have a hurdle built in. Preston has heen telling the world that Avon can increase profits 10% to 12% annually for the next three to five years. If that happens, and the stock rises in tandem, then Preston's gain on his options will merely equal what he gave up in expected raises and bonuses. In other words beat his own projections for the company. That's incentive. Note that the plan is not fancy. Yet it more than satisfies major institutional shareholders who have been ticked at Avon for beating back four takeover attempts in three years. Preston meets twice yearly with representatives of these shareholders, and Ralph Whitworth of the United Shareholders Association came to last November's gathering "loaded up to talk about compensation," he says. But Preston preempted the attack by announcing his new pay plan first. "Jim and I have talked about compensation for years," says Gault. "At Goodyear the vast majority of my reward will be directly tied to stock. It's not a surprise that Jim would want his compensation on this basis." Preston explains how the plan has affected him: "I have an incredibly vested interest in shareholder value. My focus is on making myself and thousands of others wealthy." To see a sophisticated and effective use of options, check the pay plan at UGI, Pennsylvania. When James Sutton took over as CEO in 1986, UGI ranked 23rd in a group of 23 peer companies on the basis of total return to shareholders over the previous five years. To turn things around, Sutton and his board decided to replace a jumble of long-term pay plans with a single option plan. He and his top officers would get option grants, and then no more options for five years. During that time the substantial dividends associated with the option shares would be placed in a special account for each officer. After the five years -- which ended last December 31 -- the officers could get their dividends according to how UGI raked in its peer group based on five-year total return. If it ranked No. 10 or below, they would get nothing; if No. 7 through No. 9, they would get 50% of the dividends; if No. 2 through No. 6, 100%; and if UGI ranked No. 1, they would get 160%. When the big day came, UGI ranked five-year compound average annual return of 17.2% -- far better than the stock market. Sutton collected $1.5 million. After paying taxes, he invested the rest in UGI stock. All his top officers did the same. "We wanted a high-risk, high-reward plan," he says. "It caused us to take a long-term view. Every time we looked at a major project or strategic decision, we ended up reducing it to shareholder value." Georgia-Pacific recently adopted a different sort of stock-based incentive. At the instigation of CEO T. Marshall Hahn Jr., the company abandoned stock options for top officers in 1988, replacing them in 1990 with outright grants of stock carrying some tight restrictions. If the stock rises 20% from a $50 base (about $8 higher than the actual price when the program started) and stays at that level for 20 consecutive trading days, the officers get 20% of their grants. If it rises 40% and stays there for 20 straight days, they get 40%, and so on can receive up to 100% of their stock grants -- if the stock has doubled. They must hold for at least five years whatever stock they get. Wall Street analysts who follow the struggling paper industry like the plan. Says Chip Dillon of First Manhattan: "It gives management more incentive to do what's in the interests of the shareholders." Design such a plan without sufficiently high hurdles and you're asking for trouble. Ralston Purina's board told CEO William P. Stiritz and his top officers in 1986 that if they could get the stock up 60%, they would collect large helpings of it. The job took five years, and Stiritz collected $16 million of shares for a performance that barely exceeded the market's and failed to match the food-processing industry's. The plan did exactly what a good plan shouldn't: pay big for subpar performance. Stiritz won't talk about it, but Ralston has said in a prepared statement that the plan "was appropriate for the company at the time in well-designed plans is getting a lot of stock into the CEO's hands and making sure it costs him. It could cost him years of raises, as at Avon, or it could cost him a pay cut. That's what happened at International Multifoods in Minneapolis, where CEO Anthony Luiso asked the board to trim his cash compensation by $200,000 a year for five years in return for stock options of equal value. Such reforms could even cost the CEO money out of his checking account. A number of compensation experts think a smart board might simply set a stock ownership goal for the CEO and tell him to reach it any way he wants -- by exercising old options or by calling up his broker. In any case, whenever a CEO exercises options the board should insist that he sell only enough of the shares to pay the taxes -- and hold the rest. That doesn't just sound like common sense; it also is in sync with research by consultant Ira Kay of the Hay Group's stock a CEO owns, the better the company performs. But wait. Isn't this just a bit draconian, making the CEO live and die by the stock? After all, researchers have shown that most of a stock price's movement results not from the actions of managers but from the movement of the market. Is it really fair to make a good, hardworking corporate chief suffer when the inscrutable market moves against him? Sure it is, say investor rights advocates, who point out that when the stock goes down, investors suffer and employees often suffer, so why shouldn't the CEO suffer too? A better response is that "suffer" is perhaps not the mot juste here. No CEO of a large American company is going to suffer, as most people would understand that term, no matter what the stock does, thanks to two little items called base and bonus. In major companies these generally furnish a million or two annually to keep body and soul together no matter Avon, whose base salary is barely average for a company with sales of $3.6 billion, maintains a wry sense of perspective on the matter: "I have a safety net of $610,000, and believe me that's more than adequate. My family and I have agreed that no matter what happens, we'll squeak by." In truth, salaries are not much of an issue in the furor over CEO pay. They account for only about one-third of total compensation, and finding one much above $1 million isn't easy. That's a lot of money, but it won't get you on a magazine cover or denounced on the Senate floor. Bonuses are another matter. The practice of awarding them "at the discretion of the board" is an invitation to negate all the good intentions of a pay-for-performance plan. To avoid this, many companies set explicit targets -- for earnings, return on assets, or some other measure -- that will trigger a bonus, and stick to them. or 1991 because abnormally warm weather cut demand for gas and electricity, which clobbered earnings per share. Is that fair? "Life isn't fair," he shrugs. Varying this approach, some boards set the bonus as a flat percentage of profits. Reebok famously did this for CEO Paul Fireman when the company was tiny, and as it mushroomed his bonus did too -- alarmingly -- exceeding $15 million in 1987. Disney CEO Michael Eisner gets a profit-based bonus, $4.7 million in fiscal 1991. So does Time Warner's Steve Ross. While the 1991 amount hasn't been announced, it will be larger than last year's $2 million because operating profits were higher. The danger in the focus on profits is that it zooms in on just one accounting measure, one that a clever CEO may be able to manipulate, perhaps to the detriment of the company. It may be "too easy to kite," as Stanley Gault says. So there's no easy, mechanical approach to calculating, you've got to rely on it. Which leads to the great big question in the world of CEO pay: How do you get the board to do the right thing? Even if you devise the most brilliant compensation plan ever, why should the directors adopt it? Because their job is to discipline management for the good of the shareholders? Remember that effective CEO pay plans always involve a hefty risk -- something many CEOs, like most other people, don't like. Remember also that CEOs in essence appoint the directors to their prestigious positions and usually recommend their pay. These directors are not naturally eager to hold the CEO's feet to the fire on compensation. Note that not one of the well-designed pay plans cited here was imposed on a CEO by his board. On the contrary: In each ease a confident CEO approached the board saying, "I'm willing to take on more risk if you'll give me a shot at some extra reward." Such cases are rare on CEO pay are a few building pressures to get tough. One is the threat of legal action. Directors seldom get sued for overpaying the CEO, but it happens, and in the current climate it could happen more. Fairchild, a miniconglomerate built around the old Fairchild Industries, last year settled a shareholder suit alleging that directors overpaid CEO Jeffrey J. Steiner. His salary and bonus totaled $6 million in 1990, when the company earned only $1.5 million. The settlement cuts Steiner's salary, restricts his bonus for five years, and cancels options on 50,000 shares. Institutional investors, the wakening 900-pound gorillas of corporate life, are turning their attention to CEO pay. A group of them, including the formidable California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers), last year went after ITT and won its agreement to tie CEO Rand Araskog's pay more closely to the performance of the stock. That was only one company, but the ugly publicity it endured has probably frightened many others into changing their ways, the threat of personal embarrassment or shame may be one of the strongest forces building up on directors. Time was when they scarcely had to explain their actions to anyone. But when Mike Wallace pushes a microphone under your chin, you'd better have something to say. Less concretely but just as certainly, the spirit of the times is having its effect. These are the frugal Nineties, and directors can feel it. The zeitgeist has often influenced CEO pay, which hasn't always advanced at its recent breathtaking clip. A couple of decades ago it increased more slowly than the pay of factory workers. Jude Rich of Sibson &; Co., one of America's most respected compensation consultants, says the bull market in pay that's still going on began around 1975. That was a time when the larger culture was throwing off self-restraint everywhere. Significantly, it was also around the time federal courts freed baseball players from indentured servitude by invalidating the reserve clause. Don't laugh: Many pay experts, everything changed. If pay practices are improving now, it's because CEOs and directors are feeling the heat of public outrage. It should burn steadily through the proxy season, and the presidential election will keep it alive for a while afterward. And then? Real reform, if it's to happen, will have to occur hundreds of times in boardrooms across the U.S. That is necessarily a touch-and-go proposition. Revolution may seem to be in the air, but never underestimate the power of chief executives who would really rather not change the way they're paid. Like CEOs, the rest of the country must face facts, however unpleasant: If a recovering economy or some other issue quenches the outrage and eases the pressure, there's no assurance that anything significant will change at all. AND ABROAD? * Across America the cry was inescapable as President Bush led all those CEOs on his ill-starred January tour of Japan: Our guys make three times more than theirs -- and look who's eating whose were prepared with their riposte: Don't be fooled. These Japanese CEOs get enough perks to make Queen Elizabeth weep -- and their value is never reported. What's the truth? The truth, in a sentence, is that Japanese and other non-U.S. CEOs do get perks by the truckload -- the use of company-owned homes and vacation retreats, club memberships -- but their value does not close the pay gap by a long shot. Conventional wisdom holds that this is a cause of America's competitiveness problems. But while runaway pay dissprits workers, there's no reason to think that just cutting it will, by itself, do much for U.S. competitiveness. Why not? The situation is analogous to that of the U.S. students who ranked near the bottom in an international survey of math skills but had the No. 1 opinion of themselves. In a system in which CEOs appoint their companies' directors, most of whom are other CEOs, pay is precisely the expression of what CEOs think of themselves. But that won't help the country unless they also perform better. What's true for companies is true for countries: If the U.S. were beating the pants off its rivals, hardly anyone would care what its CEOs got paid. That's why just paying less isn't the answer, and paying for performance is.
WHO CAN BLAME investors for wanting to flush 1994 down the memory hole, to borrow a disagreeable phrase from Orwell's 1984? Measured by the performance of the major stock markets, the year was a thorough downer: The Big Board slipped 5.9%, Nasdaq dropped 7.4%, and the American Stock Exchange fell no less than 11.8%. Against that grim backdrop, scores of individual stocks stand out -- for better and for worse. The lists on these pages rank the top 100 and bottom 20 performers on the major markets by total return -- price changes plus dividends -- through December 9. (Lists omitted) Compiled with the help of Barra, a Berkeley investment research firm, the lists exclude partnership units, closed-end mutual funds, REITs, preferred stock, IPOs, spinoffs, ADRs, and shares that began the year trading at less than $5 each, before splits. Six (count 'em) interest-rate hikes by the Federal Reserve didn't prevent some companies from doing their shareholders proud, but the monetary turbulence took its toll: Qualifying for 1994's, less than half the 88% required in 1993. Says Salomon Brothers strategist Marc Usem: "1994 was a stock picker's kind of market." The happiest pickers were investors in EXX, a Las Vegas maker of small toys and electric motors, formerly called SFM, whose stock blew away the rest of the field with a 1,269% return on the Amex. That's no surprise: EXX holds a toy license for Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, the hottest TV superheroes in town. Superior earnings powered many technology stocks onto the 1994 list. MicroTouch Systems, which makes computer screens that respond to a finger's touch, ranked first on Nasdaq, with a 447% return. Give partial credit to IBM's decision to offer the screens as an option on some of its PC monitors. Robust demand for sophisticated chips pushed semiconductor maker LSI Logic to No. 2 on the NYSE list with a 158% return. Not all the best performers posted remarkable earnings. The resurgence of mergers in 1994 accounted for United Inns. In November, privately held Harvey Hotel Co. offered $25 a share for United, which has lost money in each of its last eight fiscal years. Harvey plans to spend at least $40 million to renovate the Memphis company's 25 hotels. Five of 1993's winners grabbed the gold ring again in 1994: Micron Technology and Robert Half International on the NYSE; Cellular Communications International on Nasdaq; Rogers and Blount on the Amex. Blount, in Montgomery, Alabama, makes chains for power saws, timber-harvesting equipment, and ammunition. Among the poor performers, specialty retailer Bombay had the uncomfortable distinction of ranking third worst on the NYSE just two years after having been the best performer on the Amex. The Fort Worth company drastically scaled back the number of country furniture stores it planned to open. Crash-plagued USAir Group spun onto the list of the NYSE's worst performers. The airline is trying to stanch its losses by getting concessions from employees; no agreement is expected soon. Greyhound, meanwhile, turned bus line is struggling to compete with low-cost airlines and has been dogged by management problems (see Managing). Will investors remember 1995 more fondly than 1994? Don't bet on it. With signs abounding that the economy is still strong, the Fed could keep raising rates -- bad news for stocks. A number of experts think there's a correction in the offing: By several measures, such as the pallid 2.9% annual dividend yield of the S &P; 500, stocks are overvalued. It may prove another year for the stock pickers.
Joint and muscle strain // Baby-boomers haven't been this concerned about the condition of their joints, it's safe to say, since the day it rained at Woodstock. As the population bulge hurtles through middle age, it is stumbling, falling, and getting carted off to hospitals in numbers so huge that the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has coined a term- "boomeritis" -for injuries to aging athletes. Sports injuries to people between the ages of 35 and 54 jumped 33% between 1991 and 1998, the Consumer Product Safety Commission found in a 2000 study. In 1998, the study said, more than 365,000 boomers hurt themselves badly enough to require emergency-room treatment. Counting all injuries needing medical attention, the total was more than a million. How big is this problem? A movement by physicians to declare the years 2000 to 2010 the Bone and Joint Decade has been endorsed by the World Health Organization, the United Nations, and the Pope. On a more public level, Michael Jordan has developed a sore knee. He's 38, he's famous for his devotion to conditioning, and yet His Airness has already had to sit out a game. It's all pretty hard for baby-boomers to bear. After all, they were the first generation to spend quite so much time in the gym, and their collective effort to stay in shape is regarded as one of the biggest epidemiological events of our time. Now the wear and tear from all that exercise is paying a cruel dividend in the form of overuse injuries: sprains, strains, ligament damage, and especially osteoarthritis, the most common form of arthritis. Boomers are responding to the problem with all the fatalism and humility you would expect. They are forming lacrosse leagues for seniors. Taking up boxing in midlife. Grabbing bags of vegetables from the freezer to wrap around an inflamed knee and then going out to play another couple of games of basketball. At least that's what Ira Jaskoll does. "I always Photograph Trainer Tim Grover thinks that he can help Michael Jordan, 38 of frozen vegetables," says Jaskoll, 52, who teaches at the B-school of Yeshiva University in New York and plays hoops once a week. Last summer something popped in his knee, and his surgeon told him he should never play basketball again. The idea struck him as absurd. As a 50-year-old, he won a bronze medal at the Pan American Maccabiah Games (the "Jewish Olympics") playing on the U.S. basketball squad. "I realize there will come a time when I can't play any more," Jaskoll says, "but I'm not ready to hang 'em up." Jaskoll speaks for his generation, and on the whole it's a good thing, because earlier generations may have hung up their spikes far too soon, medically speaking-often on the advice of doctors who believed that aging inevitably involved a more or less linear, general decline in physical capacity. Baby-boomers wouldn't have accepted such an idea even if it were true, of course, and thankfully this. "People were expecting a progressive limitation," says Dr. Frank Williams, the scientific director of the American Federation for Aging Research, who is 80 and likes to bike to work at the University of Rochester in Upstate New York. Regular aerobic exercise, for instance, can increase the heart's capacity and offset the decline in rate that comes with age. "Many people can have the maximum cardiac output of young adults on into their 60s and beyond," says Dr. Williams. Furthermore, exercise may be one of the best ways to achieve what the baby boom will be looking for next on its demographic journey: what doctors call the compression of morbidity, or the postponement until near life's very end of aging's toughest afflictions. "We now realize that many of the physical deteriorations that we commonly attributed to age are attributable to disuse," says Dr. Barry Franklin, director of cardiac rehabilitation at William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Mich. Studies at Stanford University have found that of people who don't. All this leaves middle-aged people in a curious position. Is it better to keep playing one's game until the joints give out? Or to cut back on exercise and risk the pathologies of a sedentary life? The medical literature wimps out on this point; a 2000 study in the Journals of Gerontology concludes, "There is a surprising paucity of literature on sports injuries in older persons." So the baby-boomers will have to make choices-as they have been doing all along, as the first generation to grow up as "health consumers," rather than as patients who did what their doctors told them. With this freedom come pitfalls. In a recent Roper poll, 13% of Americans said they got no exercise at all and were hoping the fitness craze would prove a passing fad. For these people, the future has just recently hove into view: Segway. At the other extreme there is the sad story of Eddie Andrade, reported in the LosAngeles Times Magazine in wins and one loss, retired to Santa Barbara and kept himself on a fitness regimen so intense that he seemed to be winning the battle with time. Running, swimming, lifting weights, teaching martial arts, and sticking to a strict Pritikin diet, he was as buff in his 60s as he'd been in his 30s. Then one day, at 65, he went to a seaside cliff above a track where he sometimes trained and put a bullet into his temple. His suicide note explained simply, "Too much pain." Somewhere between those poles there must be a sensible approach, but even fitness trainers are having to find their way in the dark. When Tim Grover got his master's in exercise physiology in 1989, he says, "What you did was, you either learned to train the athlete in his prime or you learned geriatric fitness, which is people over 65." Today he is the trainer on whose shoulders rest the hopes of a generation. That is says he uses "two totally different programs" depending on whether an athlete is in his prime or past it. "You're going from a low-rep, quick type of movement to more reps, lower weights. We're saying, Okay, your body's got a lot of wear and tear. Stabilize those muscles." Jordan, he says, is "in the older guy's regimen," and while he won't disclose training secrets, he says "we are trying some new techniques." Assuming Jordan's knee gets better, this could be fun to watch. Says Grover, tantalizingly: "We should know in a couple of months whether we have found a way to rebuild some of those fast-twitch muscles." What he's referring to is the problem of muscle loss, which affects sedentary people at the rate of about 1% a year. Muscles can be rebuilt with weight training and other sorts of exercise, but the tissue that's restored tends to be of the why geezers play sneaky tennis. There is little disagreement that keeping muscles strong is one of the best ways to stave off osteoarthritis. Modern drugs like ibuprofen and naproxen can reduce swelling once the disease has set in. (WD-40 is not recommended, though doctors report that a disturbingly large number of patients spray the stuff on their joints. Really.) But the best defense is to keep muscles strong enough to prevent joints from getting misaligned in the first place. The problem is, which muscles? "Maybe you do weightlifting for the aesthetics of how you look," says Peggy Brill, a New York physical therapist who has a practice at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter and spends a lot of her time repairing investment bankers. "But if you develop muscles at the expense of your joints, that's not good weightlifting. My thinking is always, How do you develop your postural strength? Because if your postural strength is strong, then your joints align properly." Does this sound like you your eyes closed. Teetering is permitted, but you should be able to keep one foot off the ground for 30 seconds. Now try squatting with your heels on the floor. Now drop and give me ten (knee pushups are acceptable if you're a girl). Now crush a beer can against your forehead. No, sorry: Touch your hands behind your back, one reaching down behind your neck and the other up under your shoulder blade. If you can't do those things, even in your 60s, Brill says, you should probably change your workout. Photograph Physical therapist Peggy Brill tricks some of her corporate clients into doing yoga. // And unfortunately, you should probably be doing the very things you are disinclined to do. Most people like to stick with what they're good at, and that is often the root of overuse injuries. "A lot of the executives here, when I started eight years ago, would never have wanted to do yoga," Brill says doing yoga. I just had them doing stretch routines, and after they got really good at it I said, You know, that's yoga. "Ah, yes, ego. Dr. Richard Steadman, the renowned Vail, Colo., knee surgeon, says ego is what drives a lot of patients into his clinic for repairs." "Baby-boomers wouldn't make the same investments today, for instance, that they made when they were 20 years younger," Steadman says. "But your exercise is part of your ego, and people have a different approach to exercise than they do to prudent investment." It is possible, of course, that stem-cell research and other scientific advances will produce new ways to ease creaky joints. A company called Genzyme in Cambridge, Mass., has had success repairing joints by harvesting healthy cartilage cells, culturing them in a lab, and then transplanting them back into knees. But the procedure, called a carticel implant, has worked best in young athletes, in "patients with wear-and-tear arthritis," Dr. Steadman says. "My first advice to most people is to adjust their exercise to fit their knee, and not go through a bunch of surgical procedures to make their knee fit their lifestyle." Photograph Dr. Frank Williams, 80, is still riding his bike to work most days. // Tim Grover gives the same advice to the elite athletes he trains. "You have to say, 'Today I'm only going to play two games of basketball, not three.'" That's about how Ira Jaskoll sees it too. He's decided not to try out for the Maccabiah games again, but he's still playing basketball, taking his frozen vegetables with him and strapping a brace onto each knee. "I always stretch before I play," he says, "and then I try to play within myself. It's that extra game when you get real sore." But, he adds, "how can you say no if but that's what the Woodstock generation will probably have to do if it is to avoid its greatest fear: becoming a bunch of artificial hipsters.
Paul Strand long has been recognized as among this nation's most important 20th-century photographers, one of a group of writers, poets, critics, cultural historians, and artists who came of age during World War I, foretelling the birth of a new American culture. However, the full extent of his accomplishments and contribution, not just to the history of photography, but to modern art, has not been appreciated fully. Since the last U.S. retrospective of his work in 1971 at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Strand has been known primarily through reproductions, which do not indicate truthfully the range of his stunning craftsmanship. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, many previously unknown images were discovered, including early abstractions and studies of New York. They reveal Strand's thorough understanding of the latest developments in European and American art as well as his ability to translate this knowledge into the medium of photography, as seen in pictures taken during 1916 such as "Porch Shadows," "Bowls," and "Chair." Unlike many other U.S. craftsmen not simply adopt the look of European art, but was able to transform it into something that was uniquely his own and distinctly American. Strand's photographs also evocatively illustrate his lifelong quest to reveal, as he wrote, "the essential character of a place and its people," not through a country's obvious symbols of grandeur, monumentality, or power, but in the telling details of its people, landscape, and architecture. Strand was born in 1890 in New York and attended the Ethical Culture School. Alfred Stieglitz, the renowned photographer widely celebrated for introducing modernist art to the American public, recognized the young Strand's talent and gave him a one-man show at the 291 Gallery in New York in 1916. Through images taken in 1915 -- such as "Wall Street, New York" and "Fifth Avenue, New York" -- Strand portrayed a city in which the physical environment of buildings and streets was as vibrant as the people who inhabited it. After World War I, during Charles Sheeler on the film "Manhatta," an attempt to capture, as Strand wrote, New York's "power and beauty and movement." In the turbulent 1930s, Strand's noncommercial movies often had a social message. "The Wave," produced for the government of Mexico, depicted the struggles of the Indians to be paid decent wages. While president of Frontier Films, a nonprofit educational motion-picture group, he worked intensively on "Native Land," a film based on the denial of civil liberties to labor activists during that decade. The money Strand earned as a freelance cameraman throughout the 1920s and 1930s enabled him to make still photographs in his spare time. Beginning in 1920, he shot a series of pictures of his wife, Rebecca. Although the portraits were close-ups, there is a respectful distance between the photographer and the subject. In this way, Strand allowed his wife to project her personality, rather than imposing himself or his understanding of her onto the image. This "Blind Woman, New York," "Alfred Stieglitz," and "Mr. Bennett, Vermont." Through the 1920s, Strand made close-up studies of plants and other nature forms. In many of these, nature assumes anthropomorphic forms, yet never is abstracted completely and always remains rooted in reality. In the same vein, he photographed architectural details and machine parts. Through the late 1920s and early 1930s, Strand pulled his camera back to encompass the larger physical, psychological, and historical relationships between people, objects, and their environment in his portraits of Mexico and New Mexico. During this time, he came to believe that art was not so much a form of personal temperament as of social expression. Some 106 of Strand's images of 18th-century churches, town halls, cemeteries, weathered buildings, and even trees, rocks, and people, made in the 1940s, were incorporated with excerpts by early New England writers in the book, Time in New England, that he produced with grips with the profound and pervasive horrors of World War II, it created a dynamic portrait of the region that inspired and reflected the country's traditional, yet enduring, values. Strand settled in France in the early 1950s. In his European photographs over the next two decades, he attempted to show "what is healthy and growing in society... stories of human victories, however small, in the struggle for social health and well-being." He produced a series of books on France, the Italian village of Luzzara, the Outer Hebrides, and Egypt, in addition to photographing extensively in Morocco, Romania, and Ghana. Slowed down by ill health and poor eyesight, Strand eventually was unable to withstand the rigors of travel and turned to his garden at his home in Orgeval, France. The last images of this garden represented, as he wrote a few days before his death in 1976, another "expedition into the unknown." A retrospective of Strand's work, including approximately 150 photos may be seen at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, from March 12 to May 15. The show, "Paul Strand: People and Place," then will conclude its U.S. tour at the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco (June 14-Aug. 16). Ms. Ziska is a publicist with the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., where the exhibition, "Paul Strand: People and Place," originated.
In the desert, when a distressed animal is on the verge of death, vultures gather above. This hovering horde of bone pickers sense, with great precision, the near-terminal condition of the creature. Patiently, with uncanny determination, the birds plot their moves. Then, at the very minute they witness the last gasp of their would-be feast, they strike. In short order, they have engorged their victim, ravenously consuming everything edible that hangs from the carcass. Finally, they depart, but behind they have left a warning, maybe meant as a boast. Scattered across the desert floor are the bones of their prey. Left to decay in the hot sun, they remain as a sign to the rest of us that another creature is just waiting to take advantage of our suffering. Not all vultures operate in the desert, nor are they all winged creatures of the Cathartidae family, identified by their dark plumage and naked head and neck. Some can be identified by their white coats, luxurious automobiles, and average after-tax income of $120,000 their name. They often are spotted at meetings of local or state medical societies. Many migrate to warm-weather resorts in the winter or to Chicago in the summer -- the nesting sites of the American Medical Association's conventions. Even if you do not spot these vultures visually, you may hear them. They often perch on radio talk shows or leave their verbal droppings in the local newspaper. While their chirping tune can vary, it generally is recognized by complaints about Medicare reimbursement, patients' lawsuits, failure of consumers to understand how tough it is for birds of their feather, and the lack of respect most mortals have for such an important species. Indeed, it is this species -- the Vulture Medicus -- who today pose a very serious threat to most American consumers. While economists are in dispute about whether we remain in a recession, the Vulture Medicus continues to stalk its prey, having spotted indicators on the nightly news. The stock market is highly volatile. Oil prices are creeping back up are down, meaning invested income earns less. Unemployment still is rising. Companies are delaying expansion. Truck and auto manufacturers are shutting down plants. Steel manufacturers are hurting and making joint deals with foreign competitors. To the Vulture Medicus, these signs are a call to hover. While the rest of society gives in or gives up, the Vulture Medicus is planning its move. Americans should take heed. The bones from its previous attack still are out there. They have been bleaching in the sun since the last recession and can not be ignored. The Vulture Medicus remembers the early 1980s, recalling how companies fired hundreds of thousands of medically insured workers. Consumers came to its office less likely to accept the creature's suggestion to have some elective surgery done. This creature saw costs rise, but the number of patients remain static. So, it raised prices, making sure to keep its increases at least twice that of normal inflation. Why should Vulture Medicus have to alter its lifestyle? Vulture salesmen, and more deserving of the good life than teachers or municipal workers. In the early 1980s, when many of these people put the word "former" before their occupational description, Vulture Medicus flourished. Its income rose. Hospitals were giving it bonuses to bring in more patients. The creature started its own laboratory, dispensed medication in its own office, maybe even bought a free-standing emergency center. Life was so good that more Vulture Medicae were bred. In fact, the number hatched since 1980, compared to the growth of the general population, has caused most major metropolitan areas to be overrun by the species. Some experts argue that their numbers constitute as big a public health hazard as their pigeon relatives. Only a glut of Vulture Medicae can account for the creation of such medical specialties as sports gynecology or sports medicine. The signs of another Vulture Medicus attack are emerging. They are complaining to the government about being overregulated. They carp about patients who can not afford to pay. to the Editor "columns whining about the enormous increases in their cost of doing business. They have the unmitigated gall to acknowledge that they overtest and perform unnecessary surgery, all in the name of self-defense. Women seem to be particularly prime pickings. Ornithologists may attribute this to the three-to-one ratio of male Vulture Medicae to the female variety. Whatever the reason, the facts are clear: The female human is the most obvious victim. For instance, 25% of all babies born in America are delivered by Cesarian section. In 1970, only five percent of births were surgically assisted. England, with an 11.5% C-section rate, considers that number to be a national disgrace, brimming on scandal. The defensive medicine argument doesn't hold up in the C-section fiasco. In places where hospitals have made concerted efforts to monitor unnecessary C-sections, some rates have dropped by as much as 50%. Some insurers -- the principal feed providers to the species -- have started paying the subspecies Vulture Obstetricus the same amount whether the on the effect of such financing changes show a drop in C-sections. The examples of women as choice game are many. Experts suggest that more than half the hysterectomies performed are unnecessary. The number of tranquilizers prescribed to females are three times those doled out to males. Every month, more than 10,000 women are having artificial breast implants inserted under the skin of their chests. These implants -- of which 30-40% later capsulate -- finally have come under Food and Drug Administration scrutiny for safety reasons. Nevertheless, the sub-creature Vulture Cosmeticus Surgeonus rarely discloses the potential side effects of these **26;227;TOOLONG vanity devices to its quarry. The human male is not immune as prey. Thirty percent of all coronary bypass operations, most of which are undergone by men, are considered unnecessary. Certain prostate procedures now are coming under suspicion as being performed inappropriately in many situations. Even young members of the human species are caught in this apparent campaign of greed. Tonsils are being removed unnecessarily. Circumcisions are being performed when not medically or children's ears than clinically called for. It is clear that, like their winged brothers, Vulture Medicae shows no mercy for their victims. Physician fees are rising at a 15% annual rate, even though normal inflation is less than six percent. Isn't this almost three-fold disparity another indication that Vulture Medicus is at it again? Vulture Medicae are crafty old birds. They have worked hard over the years to develop a beautiful coat of feathers that covers an often ruthless personality. On the outside, most appear compassionate and kind, with a soothing coo, a pleasant facial demeanor, and a nest that offers comforting health literature and calming music. No finer aviary can be found than that of a successful Vulture Medicus. Yet, beneath that surface of fine plumage often lurks a self-centered, hawk-like personality. Too many of the species are inconsiderate and uncaring. Some keep their prey stewing for hours on end, trapped in a chamber with other sick creatures. Their assistants, canaries in white, try has an emergency! While we're waiting, let's fill out some insurance forms," or "The Vulture is running behind. Just be patient." In reality, many merely are on the phone with another shrewd bird, plotting a business investment. Studies of the Vulture Medicus report a changing bird. The education received from its elders is more technical than human. The Vulture Medicus has become so impersonal that many hospitals are using ink markers on patients before they are sent down to the surgical suite to avoid the Vulture Medicus performing the wrong procedure. All this transpires because the Vulture Medicus too often views its game as a condition, rather than a person. It is not unusual for a hospitalized patient to hear himself or herself referred to as the "gallbladder in room 405." COLLUSION WITH HOSPITALS Hospitals are where the species loves to hang out since they provide a wealth of devices and equipment for its free use. It's a game that hospitals play in order to attract the of the breed doesn't equate to the best medical results. It merely may mean providing the largest amount to the bottom line. Indeed, the Vulture Medicus who admits the most patients or does the most high-volume, expensive procedures is treated like royalty. An entire hospital wing (no pun intended) may be dedicated to this pillar of the community. Talon to talon, hospitals and Vulture Medicus work together. They often collude to keep important information out of the hands of the general public. Very few people are told what a hospital infection rate is. Hardly a soul knows how many medication errors a hospital makes in a day. When a member of the inner gaggle decides to squawk about an incompetent, fellow old coot, the species circles and goes right for the eyes, ears, nose, and throat of the bird with the loud caw. What results is a broken bird, with no referrals, less privileges, and few friends. Other birds see this and decide to keep closed-beaked a powerful creature, but there are signs that its strength is weakening. Since the middle 1960s, the species has lost many big battles. It started with Medicare, which the entire Medicus family opposed. They screeched that Medicare would be the demise of quality medical care. It was the first step to a "socialized" medical system and would hurt, rather than help, the public, they maintained. As it turned out, Medicare proved a godsend to the Vulture Medicus. The program guaranteed that the often sickest members of society now would be able to pay for medical care. Not only did it mean that elderly Americans had access to medical services, it also signified that Vulture Medicus could give its charity to a place that could put its name on a plaque, rather than have to provide medical care to some poor elderly soul. Of course, Vulture Medicus opposed health maintenance organizations. Such programs took the fun out of medicine. HMOs meant Vulture Medicus would be paid unnecessary tests and procedures. That was a whole new tree to get used to, but Vulture Medicus has had to do so. Today, Vulture Medicus continues trying to exert its power. The American Medical Association has offered its plan to assure full access to health care to all Americans. With 37,000,000 uninsured Americans, the Vulture Medicus has a lot at stake. Just think what life could be like if 37,000,000 more potential people were available for the picking. It makes even the nicest of birds sharpen its beak. The victim of the vulture in the desert usually is helpless when the hovering begins. Nothing short of a miracle can save the wretched prey from the talons and beak of its predator. However, we do not have to be the victim of Vulture Medicae. We are not down nor are we helpless. We must ignore their cackling and take charge ourselves. Vulture Medicus is a family of predators that can be tamed in the marketplace, halls of state and Federal legislative bodies, and and regulations that govern medicine. All species of vulture hover only if there is a victim soon to be had. Without victims, the predator either must change its ways or die off. Our job is not to be a victim. Mr. Inlander is president, People's Medical Society, Allentown, Pa., the nation's largest consumer advocacy organization.
NOVELIST Walker Percy once was asked what concerned him most about the future of America. He responded: "Probably the fear of seeing America, with all its great strength and beauty and freedom gradually subside into decay through default and be defeated, not by the Communist movement but from within by weariness, boredom, cynicism, greed and in the end helplessness before its great problems." The social science data confirm Percy's concerns. They are uncomfortably close to becoming reality. Since 1960, the U.S. population has grown 41%, the gross domestic product nearly has tripled, and total levels of social spending by all levels of government (measured in constant 1990 dollars) have risen from $143,730,000,000 to $787,000,000,000 -- more than a fivefold increase. During the same 34-year period, there has been a more than 500% rise in violent crime; a greater than 400% hike in illegitimate births; a tripling of the percentage of children living in single-parent homes; a threefold increase in teenage suicides; a doubling in the divorce rate; and a drop of almost 75 points this period than the American family. Today, 30% of all births and almost 70% of all black births are to unmarried females. By the end of the century, according to the most reliable projections, 40% of all births and 80% of minority births will be out of wedlock. In a few years, illegitimacy will surpass divorce as the main cause of fatherlessness in the U.S. These figures have frightening social implications, but should not cause Americans to despair. Instead, they should stir the nation. There are three brief explanations for what accounts for America's social regression. The first has to do with a marked shift in the public's attitudes. According to social scientist James Q. Wilson, "The powers exercised by the institutions of social control have been constrained, and people, especially young people, have embraced an ethos that values self-expression over self-control." During the last quarter-century, the American people increasingly have abandoned time-honored moral codes. The U.S. now is seeing the results being played out on, and classrooms. A second is that a number of pernicious ideas made their way into the mainstream of American life. It became unfashionable to make value judgments. The nation witnessed an expansive notion of "rights" and an attenuated sense of personal responsibility. "If it feels good, do it"; "Do your own thing"; and "You only go around once in life, so you have to grab all the gusto you can" became words to live by. These seemingly innocuous phrases masked a destructive underlying philosophy that eventually found its way into public policy. A third explanation has to do with the failures of contemporary liberalism -- an ideology that dominates the national Democratic Party. A series of misguided social policies were championed. In the area of criminal justice, an anti-incarceration outlook took hold that said, in effect, society's response to criminal behavior should be rehabilitation, not punishment. Schools replaced moral education with "values clarification," standards were abandoned, and homework was with government subsidies in the form of welfare checks. Through the National Endowment for the Arts, government got into the business of subsidizing pornography and obscenity. Abortion, for any reason, at any point in pregnancy, was elevated to a constitutional right. Tax policies penalized the traditional nuclear family. No-fault divorce laws made a mockery of the belief that marriage is a sacred covenant. Racial relations deteriorated as, in law and policy, people began to be judged not by the content of their character, but by the color of their skin (i.e., quotas, race-norming, and set-asides). These policies effectively tore down cultural guardrails. Not surprisingly, individual casualties followed. In his 1994 State of the Union address, Pres. Clinton expressed a deeply conservative sentiment: "And let's be honest, we all know something else, too. Our problems go way beyond the reach of government. They're rooted in the loss of values and the disappearance of work and the breakdown of our families and on display when these words are contrasted with his 1992 Democratic Convention address:" I'm fed up with politicians in Washington lecturing Americans about "family values."") When public opinion calls for it, Clinton clearly can talk the values talk. Now, the public should insist that he walk the values walk. Americans should insist that he govern by his words and that he live by them. If the President is serious about his newfound, deeply felt interest in "values," there are a number of tangible things that he and his party immediately can do to show it: * End the drug legalization talk by Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders; increase the anti-drug budget for law enforcement; and provide leadershp on the drug issue. * Reverse the decision to cut funds for the construction of Federal prisons and Federal law enforcement agencies such as the Drug Enforcement Administration, FBI, and others. * Appoint an attorney general who is serious about passing tough, intelligent law enforcement policies instead of and is engaged in a never-ending search for the "root causes" of crime. (One veteran drug prosecutor recently asked, "Am I now employed by the Justice Department or the Department of Social Work?") * Support real welfare reform instead of huge funding increases for the welfare bureaucracy. (The 1993 Clinton budget included $110,000,000,000 over five years to fund completely conventional welfare programs.) Welfare reform shouldn't be a euphemism for a giant public works program. * Appoint an AIDS czar who does not believe that the real problem in America is a repressed Victorian society that denies sexuality early. * Support, instead of undermine, the Boy Scouts of America. * Provide tax relief to families with children. * Treat the military as it deserves to be, with respect and honor, not as a laboratory of social experimentation or the Federal government's most loathed department. * Get the Department of Education to challenge the education establishment, instead of feeding it, and promote true education reform. on, finally, is accountability. Clinton should be held accountable for how he governs, not by what he says. If that is the standard, he will remain extremely vulnerable on the issue of "values." One of the things that eventually will erode public confidence in, and increase cynicism toward, the Clinton Administration is the enormous gap between what the President says and what he does. It is the responsibility of the "loyal opposition" to keep the light and the heat on the President and his radical social agenda. Accordingly, Republicans should not fall into the trap of merely cursing the political darkness; they have an obligation to light candles as well. Those who strongly oppose the Clinton Administration's liberal social agenda need to promote policies that would encourage cultural renewal and individual responsibility. Republicans should hammer home the point of how much better American life would be if a sweeping, reform-minded, and humane social agenda were implemented that included: * A more effective and tough-minded criminal justice system * Reform of the juvenile criminal justice system (including trying as adults juveniles who commit violent crimes). * Increased attention to victims' rights and roles in the criminal justice process. * Reform of parole. * Enactment of "truth in sentencing" guidelines. * Alternative forms of punishment, such as boot camps. * An integrated anti-drug strategy. * Ceasing welfare payments for anyone having a child out of wedlock. One year after legislation is passed, all forms of economic support for single mothers who have new children should be ended -- including Aid to Families with Dependent Children payments, subsidized housing, and food stamps -- and visitation rights of fathers of children born out of wedlock should be terminated: Illegitimacy is America's most serious social problem, and welfare is illegitimacy's economic life-support system. It's time to pull the plug. * The fundamental reform of education through national standards, merit pay, alternative certification, and, most important, allowing parents to choose the public, private,. * Removal of the economic barriers that keep the underclass in poverty by providing tax incentives for businesses to locate in urban enterprise zones, as well as such items as tenant ownership and investment in low-income housing. * Support for families by increasing the Federal personal income tax dependent exemption. * Removal of major obstacles to adoption and increasing residential schools. congregate care facilities, and orphanages for abandoned ad abused children. It is well-known that there is some skittishness among Republicans in dealing with social issues. My response is: Philosophers from Aristotle on have understood that there is no more important political consideration than the moral precepts that underlie society and the policies that flow from them. No serious political party can duck these issues. Republicans simply must make sure that public officials deal with them in a responsible, thoughtful and constructive manner. Linking cultural and economic issues It is popular in some circles to argue that there is a dichotomy between "cultural conservatives" and "economic conservatives," but that need not be overlooked, link between cultural and economic issues. Consider two Census Bureau facts (brought to my attention by William Galston, Clinton's Deputy Assistant for Domestic Policy): The family income of black two-parent families is almost three times that of white single-parent families; and children in white single-parent families are two-and-a-half times more likely to be living in poverty than those in black two-parent families. Here is the link, then, between the Index of Leading Cultural Indicators and the Index of Leading Economic Indicators. As Republicans address the set of issues that travel under the banner of "values," they need to recognize that many of the problems afflicting society today are manifestly moral. Therefore, they are remarkably resistant to government cures, so there are limits to the degree to which public policies can cure what ails the U.S. The Republican Party needs to point out that not only are there some tasks that government can not do, in a nation of free and sovereign people, there are some tasks it should not the less they have asked of themselves. A compelling message might be this: The Republican philosophy is to say to the Federal government, "Give us back our money -- and with it, our sense of responsibility." During the last decade of the 20th century, the failures of contemporary liberalism are all around. It is an intellectually and morally bankrupt ideology, one that no longer has the power to inspire people. A confident Republican Party, therefore, should offer a fundamentally different governing philosophy and set of solutions. The GOP's task is to link the values debate to a specific set of policies, insist that moral common sense once again become the touchstone of social policy, and oppose the radical social agenda of the Clinton Administration in a principled, vigorous, and determined manner-all the while recognizing that this debate must be conducted in a calm, civilized, and reasoned voice. If Republicans do, their voices will be heard, their philosophy will prevail, and their prospects as a party if Republicans have the courage and the wisdom to seize them. Mr. Bennett, former Secretary of Education and director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, is co-director of Empower America, Washington, D.C.
The latest short story by the award-winning author and former Saturday Evening Post managing editor.
The phone rang Easter morning. Ten o'clock. Jo Ellen was lying in bed beside Chris. The children, old enough not to believe in the Easter bunny and young enough to be oblivious to the spurious relationship between chocolate and pimples, had grabbed their baskets and run off across the front yard to a neighbor's, where she imagined they were analyzing the smears on each other's faces.
She had reached toward Chris, stretched really, found him halfway. The bedroom door was locked -- the door the children banged on to wake her and Chris every morning. Years, she thought, since they'd had time for morning love. "One more privilege," she heard Chris say, "the middle class is being deprived of."
Jo Ellen found the phone across Chris's bare chest.
"I think there's been a breakdown in communications," Peter said. Peter was the priest at St. Xavier's. At had weighed 230 pounds.
"A breakdown in communications?" she said.
"Yes," Peter said. "You were supposed to fix breakfast for us -- for the choir -- this morning."
Jo Ellen thought she could hear Peter's hunger, heavy and boundless, shifting inside his vestments. She knew what must have happened. He had been late, rushing to eight o'clock mass -- the nuns, their mass already celebrated, had called to him, "Father Peter, have some breakfast?" and he had replied, "No. Haven't got time," thinking all the while he'd get one of Jo Ellen's wonderful breakfasts, sausages she'd stuffed into the casings herself, the fluffy eggs scrambled with cheese, homemade muffins.
At the beginning of Lent, Ash Wednesday's cross barely washed off the congregation's forehead, Peter had bubbled from the pulpit -- his text, "Feed My Sheep" -- that St. Xavier's was with a Saturday soup kitchen."
"St. Xavier's," he'd said, "has the best cooks in the world and Jo Ellen Rostineau's the best of the best; we're making her head of the project!"
She and Chris were new in the city. People hadn't been very friendly to them until she began to cook. Now most of the people they knew and went out with, the children's friends, too, were people they had met at church, a benefit -- "Besides the guilt," Chris said -- of being Catholic.
It was an easy step from feeding the sheep to feeding the shepherd. The first Saturday Peter had, simply in the line of pastoral encouragement, lifted the lid of one of her pots where she was cooking fresh pea soup and taken a whiff so deep and satisfying she thought the bells in the tower would clang.
"Ahhh," he'd breathed, and what could she say Cambodia? Chris had told her two weeks later, foreign mission Sunday. Why all the Christian Children's Fund has to do is slice the white meat from Peter's thighs: stuff Bangladesh.
Then Peter had asked her, again from the raised stage of the chancel, the cross behind him in authoritative support, to oversee a breakfast in the parish hall, "to bring everybody together during this special time. Maybe lead off with eggs Benedict?"
The third Sunday in Lent, 8 a.m. service, he'd said in his homily, "I can smell delicious scents wafting in from the kitchen. No telling what all Jo Ellen isn't stirring up for us." It was so folksy -- $3 apiece -- attendance increased, and at Matins, too, as people could come for breakfast, get the children in Sunday School, and be in their pews by 10:30. Jo Ellen could hardly stand it, people knowing her name, asking her for recipes a lunch, Wednesday. Then a dinner Thursday. It seemed she was at church every day. Businessmen's Bible class, Youth for Christ. She had watched in astonishment as Peter, 230, became Peter, 250. His legs rubbed together when he walked, made a noise like taffeta skirts.
As Lent moved forward, Peter's sermons dealt increasingly with Bible feasts: the Wedding Feast at Cana, the Supper at Emmaus.
The loaves and fishes (he intoned from the pulpit) you can almost taste those crusty loaves, the insides lightly and airy, but chewy, and the fishes, those wonderful Mediterranean catches, skates and scampi, barely simmered in a little olive oil, a squirt of lemon, very simply prepared -- all the Jewish culinary genius brought to bear on the boy's lunch.
Jo Ellen, aproned, sitting in the back poised to rush out at the benediction to push the fish under the boiler for lunch, could almost see the herbed oil little boy must've been. Allowed to go off on his own, secure in the love of his mom who'd packed his lunch, wide open to faith, the scent of the fresh-baked bread and the marinated fish reaching his nostrils as he walked along the early morning way. Maybe a piece of goat cheese -- feta or chevre.
He looked right at Jo Ellen, going over the rows of parishioners whose Sundays (and Wednesdays and Thursdays) had been so pleasantly altered by her cooking. She tingled with pride.
And how full of charity when the time came, how ready to be loving when HE asked this vast crowd if anybody there had food? How proud the boy was to say, "Here, Master, here am I. Take this, take all of this."
Jo Ellen stirred. The congregation had murmured somewhere between expectation and embarrassment, turning obliquely to each other as if a stranger who was not a member of the church and was never likely "What does he want?" Chris demanded, breaking her recollection, his hand fiat against the inside of her leg, their bed warm with desire. His long fingers rested a minute before insisting. She propped her elbow on his chest. The plastic phone receiver was smooth as his skin. "Hang up!" Chris said.
"Peter? I talked with the organist. She said they sang better on an empty stomach. I put out some fruit, some cheese yesterday for them."
"Some cheese?"
"In the refrigerator." She knew he was calling from the church kitchen. The phone was right next to the refrigerator. Jo Ellen thought she heard him opening the door. The image was so strong she imagined his opening the door to their bedroom, mischievous, like the children, seeing her and Chris, advancing toward them, not sternly, but lovingly, pulling back the sheet and criticizing their lovemaking the way he would her vegetable here and there's nothing to eat," Peter said, speaking absently into the refrigerator.
She heard his echoing voice strained through the cool racks, a voice hopeless and forlorn among wilted lettuce leaves, food they would never eat but could not bear to throw away.
"Don't you see the cheese?"
No answer. Paper rattled. She couldn't, she told herself, hear teeth sinking into white fontiana any more than Peter could see her and Chris in bed, Chris's long smooth arms pulling her to him, his long smooth body hairless and pure in a way she thought only women's bodies could be. Only the ravenousness of the two men made any sound.
She heard the phone receiver -- black like Peter's robe, slipping on its short cord from the church kitchen's Formica countertop, falling, dangling, knock nothing, knock nothing.
Jo Ellen felt she was falling, too, not just into the arms of a perfectly you weren't supposed to do it just for fun -- but into a mortal neglect of duty, the guilt she had felt the last few weeks of Lent because she had stopped putting on the meals when Peter had gone into the hospital about his weight.
They had felt so happy the first weeks of Lent; then one Saturday morning she'd had her feelings hurt. In the soup kitchen she had put out what she thought was a tasty meal: French toast, homemade quince jam, stewed apricots, ham. A little black child wrinkled his nose, looked down at his plate and up at his mother. "Oh, go on and eat it," she said. "I'll buy us something good later on." Peter was standing next to Jo Ellen. He put his arm around her. "You know you cross the most intimate boundaries when you offer food to people? Hey!"
She saw suddenly it was unreasonable: her spending more time at for Chris and the children at home. God -- his brides, the nuns' meals witnessed -- didn't care: canned peas, instant mashed potatoes, meat boiled to death.
Tim, Jo Ellen and Chris' son, had begun to fail math; their little girl, Kate, protesting being alone so much, had kicked in a glass bookcase door in her classroom.
Time. The house, the yard, the children. Chris's tie for tomorrow evaporated into her presence in the church kitchen. So easy saying yes, so hard doing, buying food, cooking it.
Chris had finally put his foot down. "I don't think I want to go anymore." Two weeks before Palm Sunday.
Jo Ellen's mouth opened and her mother, 20 years before, flew out. "But it's your obligation, your sacred obligation." Chris looked at her coolly, as if somewhere along the climb of their marriage, he'd made unknotted.
She'd taken refuge as she always had, in church, on her knees, alone. She saw the congregation -- the "audience," Chris called it -- was thin. It was the weekend of the regionals, the basketball tournaments. Chris hadn't let little Tim go because of his math grades. Kate was being punished for the bookcase door.
Lost in thought, Jo Ellen hadn't heard for a minute the assistant priest praying for Peter. Peter was in the hospital, he said. Diverticulosis. The assistant priest, a stickler for detail, said they were feeding him nothing but Jell-O. Raspberry Jell-O. She could see it in the stained glass window over the altar, the color of clear, translucent blood.
The news that Peter was sick had calmed her, equalizing her guilt over not wanting to cook for the church anymore and her anger with Chris.
Kneeling, she had imagined buckets of Jell-O in the hospital corridors. The light the light, a sense of loss. In the dazzling light she saw the white communion dress of her childhood consumed. She had tempted Peter. His being out of control was her fault. Her melted butter, her heavy cream, had forced his vascular walls. Her wrongs transcended the church's.
The last time she'd seen Peter, he'd seemed huge but fine. She'd been in the kitchen, bent over the oven, drawing a skewer from a line of lamb kabobs. The air was sweet with onions and bell peppers bubbling in butter. She hadn't known he was behind her. Burning her fingers slightly, she had lost her balance and tumbled backward across the kitchen, shoving Peter in her path. The thought of impaling him on the skewer had crossed her mind. Stuck, the air would have slowly hissed out of him.
Everybody, she thought, had suffered from her talents. Her children. Chris. The garden, which should've been always planted, was a tangle of last summer's weeds.
She knelt long after the assistant priest had absolved them.
When she opened her eyes, everyone was gone. Snakes of smoke rose from the extinguished candles. She felt a part of her, a noisome duty, had been extinguished, too. The altar guild woman was stripping the flowers from either side of the cross and the last note of organ music hung in the air, an accusation.
The assistant priest was waiting at the back of the church. He was tall and thin with a beard. He looked ascetic, but someone had told her he had his own stockbroker.
"Aren't you going to feed us?" he asked.
"I didn't think anybody was coming. The basketball."
"Weren't you going to feed Peter?"
"I didn't know he'd gone into the hospital. I feel sorry. There should be something. I always church, the robing room, to the kitchen. He sat down at the table, his expression and posture a history of husbands waiting for wives to feed them. She put down a paper-towel mat in front of him.
"Coffee?"
"I have to go to the hospital," he said. "The chaplains have a pool. I won't get home till after eleven."
She saw them, in black bathing suits, racing each other in the blue chlorine water. She put the plate down, the cup and saucer, the knife, spoon, and fork, though she had only a chicken sandwich and potato salad for him.
She watched him bite into the sandwich. Was she laying the same curse on him she'd put on Peter? The bite left a jagged half moon on the bread, the shape of a cry.
He sighed as if he wanted to take Peter's place in her ministration. "You don't made the mayonnaise," she said, looking at the tiny white dots of it on his mustache and lips. He licked at the spots.
She put potato salad on his plate. He ate it with the exhilaration Peter had shown when he spoke of roasting the fatted calf for the prodigal son.
"More?"
He put his plate up, a mendicant.
She plopped one big spoonful on the plate. He held it there, still. She put another half chicken sandwich on it. He steadied the plate. She scraped the bowl.
She watched him eat, seeing Peter blowing up in this man's thin face. He put his plate up to her again and cocked his head a little, waiting.
Resolved, she had gone home then, surfacing among her housework, a diver with the bends, overcome by the enormity of small tasks. At first, the work, unpraised by Peter or the other parishioners, unsanctioned by God, patch, dust-mopping under her and Chris's bed, making school lunches, became quietly satisfying.
Peter called when he got out of the hospital. She had left food in the church kitchen freezer. He wanted her to come thaw it. He cornered her when she went in Palm Sunday, saying, "You're still the chairman of the committee." He said "still" as if the appointment was eternal. He had lost very little weight though she had heard the doctors had taken out his entire lower tract and cleaned it on a towel. She felt an odd love for him as a person. "If the people aren't here," he said, speaking to a child, "we can't very well ask Him to be here." She listened for the capital "H" as if it were coming from a long way off. She thought of the hugs of ten anonymous women in the church kitchen, of how their embraces had been worth so math grades. Public love. Could she ever go back to the small arms of the children, Chris's alembic grasp?
As Chris soothed her now, Easter, in his arms, sun pouring through their bedroom window, little bubbles of pleasure popping through her body, she remembered trying unsuccessfully to calm Peter, unable to use physical means as Chris could with her.
She closed her eyes. This seemed right, this feeling, the results -- children -- the church and life for once coinciding. Chris's weight, usually gentle upon her, bore down. She closed her eyes tighter. She imagined someone dancing on his back. Peter? The weight seemed to increase. The weight, heavier and heavier, tried to exorcise the exquisite pleasure she felt. She wondered if she'd hung up the phone, whether she could. Whether her connection with Peter could be severed. The weight bore down, heavier and heavier. Dozing, the pleasure seemed farther and farther away.. Kate was jumping up and down. Tim was behind her shaking the headboard. Chris, a sheet draped around his waist, leaned on the windowsill, looking at her, waiting. She thought he might have been St. Sebastian waiting for his arrows. The hole in her stomach where breakfast should've been whimpered, harmonizing in her mind with the other stomachs she'd left empty at the church. Everyone must suffer: that was Lent. She was the eggs in the children's baskets. There was a new one: chocolate with a yellow fondant yolk. She wanted one. The thought of taking it from them, against their will, gave her an odd pleasure.
PHOTO (COLOR): Jo Ellen found the phone across Chris's bare chest. "I think there's been a breakdown in communications," Peter said.
by Starkey Flythe, Jr.
' Magic wrist' takes scientists into a new sensory realm
Whether you're learning to walk, drive a car or play tennis, you don't really know what you're doing until your entire person -- your brain, nerves, bones, muscles and senses -- somehow grasps the process. That's when you say: "I've got a feel for it."
In contrast to most everyday activities, scientific pursuits often focus on objects whose minuscule size would seem to exempt them from this whole-body sort of knowledge. How, for instance, could anyone possibly get to know atoms and molecules in this way?
A decade ago, that prospect might have sounded absurd. Yet scientists have already gained the ability to "see" atoms. Today, the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) routinely enables thousands of researchers to image material surfaces atom by atom (see "Visualizing atomic terrain"), and it has spawned a large and growing family of devices that empower investigators to conduct ever more sophisticated and revealing visual inspections of atomic expand those inspections beyond the visual realm. Just as auto mechanics rely on a combination of their eyes, ears, noses and fingers to understand a vehicle's health or dysfunction, wouldn't scientists understand more about atoms if they could sense these diminutive objects in more ways, perhaps by even "feeling" the atoms themselves?
Three robotics engineers are now putting that conjecture to the test. Ralph L. Hollis, Septimiu E. Salcudean and David W Abraham of IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, N.Y., say they can feel small clumps of atoms and are working toward sensing them one by one.
"If a machinist is interested in putting two precision parts together, he may eventually look at them under a microscope. But the first thing he will do is feel them, feel the parts and see if they're okay," Hollis says. "I thought it would be very interesting if one could feel individual atoms."
For the past four years, they call the "magic wrist." Now, he says, they have begun using it to manually steer an STM's atom-fine probe over a sample with unprecedented precision, while simultaneously feeling the sample's atomic hills and valleys in the form of small vertical movements of the magic wrist, which correspond almost perfectly to the probe's atom-scale movements over the atomic landscape.
At February's Micro Electro Mechanical Systems meeting in Napa, Calif., Hollis reported using a prototype magic wrist repeatedly to find and feel the same bumps on a surface of gold atoms. He estimates that he felt clumps containing about 10 gold atoms. "And there's no reason electronically why they shouldn't be able to get to the point of feeling single atoms," says meeting organizer Kurt Petersen, who co-founded NovaSensor, Inc., a microdevice- and sensor-making firm in Fremont, Calif.
In applying the new technique to ultra-flat, cleaved graphite surfaces, Hollis found that normal mechanical vibrations and electrical "noise" in the carbon atoms, which show up clearly in STM images. But be patient, he says.
"We are continuing to experiment with graphite and see no fundamental barrier to prevent us from achieving satisfactory operation at the level of individual atoms," the IBM researchers write in a paper that will appear in the proceedings of the meeting. To reduce mechanical vibrations, Hollis expects to move his equipment from its first-floor location to the sturdier basement of the research building.
While giving scientists a feel for the tiniest of worlds, the magic wrist could also enable them to manipulate objects formerly out of reach. The angstrom- and nanometer-scale features of atoms and molecules place them beyond the grasp of the human hand; trying to move an atom with your finger would be even harder than prodding an ant with the Washington Monument. But with the ability to steer an STM tip precisely via the magic wrist, Hollis envisions manually controlling chemical reactions by deliberately orienting specific atoms and molecules.
At a nanotechnology conference last Center in San Jose, Calif., reported some preliminary molecule-manipulating feats achieved with an STM. In one case, he and his collaborators used the instrument to slice a long organic molecule in two. In another, they "corralled" molecules by encircling them with a computer-controlled STM tip. Such manipulations could become even more precise with the help of a magic wrist, Hollis says.
And the possibilities aren't limited to steering STMs. Hollis notes, for instance, that an eye surgeon in Memphis, Tenn., is considering using a magic wrist to manipulate minuscule scissors for delicately removing retinal scar tissue from diabetic patients and vision-obscuring tissue from the eyes of some infants.
The magic wrist started out as an experiment in robotics. From the beginning, the IBM researchers saw their device as a way to refine a process called teleoperation, or the ability to control specific actions from a distance -- the same principle underlying the use of tongs to retrieve an ear of corn from boiling water. To accomplish deep sea and outer space, human workers often must remain far away, relying on robots to do the manual labor through teleoperation.
But tasks that are simple for human hands can be daunting for a robot. When a person grabs an egg from a carton, for instance, tactile information from the hands feeds back to motor-control centers in the brain, which orchestrate the finger muscles to hold the egg without breaking it. Most industrial robots lack such precise feedback and control.
"The motivation of our work was to provide robots with a soft touch," says Hollis.
The magic wrist consists of a hexagonal box called a flotor, which hovers within a stationary frame (the stator) on a magnetic "cushion" formed between the stator's six permanent magnets and the flotor's electromagnetic coils. A set of light-emitting diodes and light sensors keeps track of the flotor's position and feeds this information to a powerful computer designed specifically for the magic wrist.
In robots, the carries a gripper or some other tool. Lacking a direct mechanical connection to the arm, the flotor endows the robotic assembly with a delicate, cushiony touch, Hollis explains. A robotic arm positions the tool-equipped wrist near an object to be worked. Then the computer-guided magic wrist fine-tunes the placement and moves the tool. By distributing the magnetic forces according to mathematical algorithms formulated for different tasks, Hollis says he can control the wrist's position the way a pilot controls an airplane, specifying the roll, pitch, yaw and spatial location with a precision of one-millionth of a meter along any line and one-thousandth of a degree in rotation.
The researchers expect the wrist to expand the versatility of many standard industrial robots. "We have, in a sense, a universal mechanism," Hollis says. "We can change the mechanical properties of the magic wrist at will." To transform the wrist action from gripping to plunging, for instance, an operator would simply press a key on the computer STM, Hollis and his co-workers have converted their device into what they call a "tele-nanorobotic manipulation system." Using an algorithm that transforms human-controlled horizontal motions of the magic wrist into the horizontal positions of the STM's platinum tip, millimeter movements of the magic wrist downscale into nanometer-scale movements of the tip over an atomic landscape. A nanometer is one-billionth of a meter, and a typical atom spans several tenths of a nanometer.
But without some immediate feedback from the physical features of the landscape, a scientist operating the magic wrist would have a hard time guiding the STM tip to specific locations on a sample. To remedy this, the researchers formulated another algorithm, which magnifies the tiny vertical motions of the STM tip as it scans over the sample surface into a humanly perceivable vertical motion of the magic wrist.
"With this system, it is possible to manually probe surfaces at atomic scale, while feeling the atomic-scale topography back in the operator's hand," the researchers write in their it's floating on a very slippery block of ice," Hollis told SCIENCE NEWS.
To help scientists correlate the feel of atomic landscapes with the visual appearance of STM images, the IBM team plans to program an auxiliary computer to display images of sample surfaces that also show the path of the tip as it was steered by the teleoperator. Other possible extensions of the system include controlling the tip's vertical position by moving the wrist vertically, and using an atomic force microscope (an STM cousin) to "feel" atomic forces such as van der Waals forces. And by making the system responsive to sideways (as opposed to vertical) forces on the tip, researchers might get a feel for the tip as it automatically "slides off" a hillside, Hollis suggests. This feature could give an operator the sensation of gravity within the atomscape. In the present system, wrist operators feel no resistance or falling sensation as the STM tip ascends and descends over sample surfaces.
The IBM "minute objects formerly off-limits even to remote-controlled probing. Ian W. Hunter of McGill University in Montreal, working with colleagues from MIT and the University of Aukland in New Zealand, reports using a tele-microrobot system to grip and manipulate individual muscle cells while viewing the microscopic operation with a three-dimensional vision system. As with Hollis' system, an operator may literally get the feel of an object, Hunter and his collaborators suggested at last year's Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers conference on robotics and automation, held in Scottsdale, Ariz.
And at the February meeting in Napa, mechanical engineers Yotaro Hatamura and Hiroshi Morishita of the University of Tokyo described a prototype "nanomanipulator" for ultraprecise manufacturing tasks of the future. Although they say the ideal nanomanufacturing environment would enable a human teleoperator to experience even the sounds and smells of the ultra-Lilliputian operations, the Japanese researchers have set their sights for now on a "nanorobot system," which would enable workers to see and feel what the nanorobot is doing on submicron a prototype robot to make millionth-of-a-meter scratches in aluminum with a fine tungsten needle. A. stereoscopic scanning electron microscope helps the operator watch the actual process. A strain sensor monitors the tiny forces between the aluminum and the needle and provides feedback so the operator can better control the depth of the scratch. Hatamura and Morishita envision using improved versions of the technology for such applications as microsurgery, storing data as etched surface features, and modifying and testing tiny regions of microelectronic circuits, thin films and other materials.
Though nanomanipulation promises a wealth of practical uses, touch has its limits as a purely exploratory sense -- as anyone who has groped and stumbled through a dark, unfamiliar room will agree. Hollis and his co-workers concede that the more conventional way of surveying microscopic terrains -- converting them into a visual display -- may be more reliable and revealing than tactile sensing alone. Nevertheless, they conclude in their proceedings paper, "we may learn something by trying to' connect our own neurons' with atomic-scale phenomena touch, Hollis adds, could give scientists a kinesthetic sense of atomic surfaces -- and an exhilarating new realm of control -- the way children get a whole-body feel for riding a bike.
PHOTO (COLOR): Clumps of gold atoms appear as yellow, orange, red and white areas in this STM image. White spots represent the tallest peaks of the landscape and blue areas depict the valleys between the hills of gold.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): By carefully moving the hexagonal magic wrist within its frictionless magnetic cushion, a researcher can precisely steer the STM tip over a sample's surface. A computer immediately translates the tip's subtle vertical movements into humanly perceptible vertical movements of the magic wrist.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE)
By Ivan Amato
Visualizing atomic terrain
When an STM performs its usual image-producing role, its tip sweeps back and forth over the atomic-scale hills and valleys of a sample's surface. A computer monitors the so-called tunneling current -- a tiny flow and the sample according to quantum mechanical rules. The tunneling current changes in proportion to the gap distance. As the tip scans, a computer controls micropositioners that slightly raise or lower the tip over the sample to maintain a constant level of tunneling current. A computer plots the tip's varying vertical positions, yielding a three-dimensional image of the surface.
Looking back on five decades of the Science Talent Search
Clifford Lee Wang loves tennis and plays the piano with polish. Jeremy Randall Riddell toots the trumpet, backpacks and raises chickens. Susan Elaine Criss has earned seven varsity letters in track and soccer and has twice captained her high school soccer team.
Not exactly your description of bookworms.
These students and their fellow finalists in the 50th Westinghouse Science Talent Search form an eclectic group of teenagers: They're as exuberant about DNA as dancing, as likely to talk about betacarotene as baseball.
Next week, the 40 finalists will follow in the footsteps of 1,960 previous Westinghouse award winners since the 1940s, traveling to Washington, D.C., to exhibit their work to the public and compete for scholarships awarded at a black tie, grand finale banquet.
And if they engage in a few youthful pranks on the side, such as a late-night climb into the lap of the Lincoln Memorial statue, they'll only be echoing some of the antics of their predecessors.
The talent search (two ex-reporters who, in the late 1930s, sought to identify and encourage budding science talent among high school students. One was Watson Davis, the first radio reporter to specialize in science, who in 1933 became director of Science Service, Inc. -- a nonprofit foundation dedicated to improving public understanding of science and which publishes SCIENCE NEWS.
The other was G. Edward Pendray, a former science editor for the New York Herald Tribune, who joined the Westinghouse Electric Corp. in 1936 as special assistant to its president. He and Davis met in New York City at the 1939 World's Fair, where, thanks to Pendray's efforts, Westinghouse displayed the winning entries of A science fair open to New York City high school students.
The World's Fair of' 39, boasting such marvels as the first television sets and a shimmering fountain of dancing water plumes, reflected the new optimism of a nation recovering from the Great Depression. It was there that Pendray and Davis decided science education in the
At the time, fewer than 1,000 of the nation's 25,000 high schools employed trained science teachers or even offered rudimentary science courses. Often, a meager curriculum labeled as "science" was relegated to the athletic coach.
"Watson and I agreed that science was too important for the nation and the coming generation to be neglected in the high schools," Pendray later recalled. So they devised a plan to publicize the importance of science education by encouraging teenagers to design and perform their own experiments. The promise of college scholarship money would provide a financial incentive for the students, they reasoned, and science teachers could earn recognition through their students' awards.
"Having the competition gives the teachers a tangible target for students to shoot for," says G. Reynolds Clark, president of the Westinghouse Foundation. Westinghouse has provided more than $2.8 million in scholarships and cash awards to talent search winners over the past 50 years.
"Watson Davis always said,' Kids should get their Dorothy Reynolds Schriver, who became Davis' personal secretary in 1941 and who directed the talent search from 1958 to 1986. Since 1986, Carol Luszcz of Science Service has administered the program.
The first Westinghouse Science Talent Search began early in 1942, just months after the attack on Pearl Harbor drew the nation into World War II. The program's organizers contacted every U.S. high school directly while also spreading the word through a national organization of high school science clubs, headquartered at Science Service. That year's competition drew some 3,000 applications but did not involve student research projects. Instead, all candidates took a special exam and wrote essays on a timely topic: how science could help win the war.
"I believe that, because their ingenuity has always had unlimited exercise in the field of free thought, the scientific men of the United Nations and particularly of America will ultimately outstrip the regimented researchers of the Axis powers in the development of those processes and inventions that will enable the fighters for Teschan in an essay outlining "five avenues of scientific attack." Submissions from other students echoed his sentiment.
Evaluating boys and girls separately (a practice that would continue until 1948), the three judges whittled down the list of applicants to 300 semifinalists and then selected the top 40 to come to Washington in June to compete for scholarship money (That basic selection process continues today From a field of about 1,500 entries, eight judges select the 300 semifinalists and 40 finalists. Based on interviews with each finalist, the judges then award scholarship prizes. This year the top 10 winners will share a total of $175,000; the remaining 30 finalists will each receive a $1,000 scholarship.)
Eleanor Roosevelt greeted the 1942 finalists at the White House, serving them tea on the South Portico. The two top winners that year were Marina Prajmovsky of Farmingdale, N.Y., and Teschan, of Shorewood, Wis.
"It came as a total surprise, really, that I even should have been among the banquet, when they awarded me one of the two top scholarships, I was floored." For Teschan, the scholarship meant attending Carleton College without taking on a full-time job to pay for tuition. But there was a more fundamental benefit, he says: "It affirmed that I had some of the ingredients necessary for success in science."
"It was fine to get high marks and do well in high school," he adds, "but the idea that I could compete successfully in a field of top students from all over the United States provided an assurance that I was on the right track. It told me: 'Go for it, kid!'"
Teschan went on to medical school and a 21 -year research career in the Army He now studies kidney disease at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville.
By the 1950s, science-minded teenagers had begun to associate "top 40" with something other than pop tunes. A generation of young Jewish many of the top talent search scholarships during that era. Many studied at one of two New York City schools that continue to specialize in science education today: Stuyvesant High School and the Bronx High School of Science.
Among those students was Roald Hoffmann, a young immigrant from Poland. When Hoffmann was 6, his father smuggled him and his mother out of a Nazi labor camp. Mother and child hid in the attic of a Polish schoolhouse; the Nazis killed Hoffmann's father. After the war, Hoffmann and his mother lived in refugee camps, where he read biographies of Marie Curie and George Washington Carver.
He and his mother emigrated to the United States in 1949, where the 11-year-old learned English -- his sixth language. And in 1955, Hoffmann -- then a senior at Stuyvesant -- entered the talent search with a project analyzing the tracks of cosmic rays. His winning study earned him his first trip to Washington, where he posed for a photograph with President Eisenhower along with other perhaps the most significant event of that trip, he says, was the chance to meet with a scientist from the National Bureau of Standards. The researcher encouraged Hoffmann to apply for a summer job at the bureau, and he got the position. That summer's experience-rare for a high school student -- sparked a lifelong interest in chemistry
"I came into chemistry through a sequence of events that began with the Westinghouse Science Talent Search," he says. Now a professor of chemistry at Cornell University, Hoffmann has also written two books of poetry. In 1981, he won the Nobel prize in chemistry for applying the laws of quantum mechanics to chemical reactions and structure.
Four other Westinghouse winners have gone on to become Nobel laureates: chemist Walter Gilbert and physicists Sheldon L. Glashow, Leon N. Cooper and Ben R. Mottelson. Cooper credits the student competition with his acceptance into Columbia University in 1948 -- a time, he says, when the university took few applicants from New York. Two talent known informally as the Nobel prize of mathematics -- and Eight have received McArthur Foundation fellowships, nicknamed "the Genius awards."
The search has undergone several changes over the years. Beginning in 1948, the judges evaluated males and females as a single group, and in 1972, Nina Tabachnik Schor became the first female to capture first place among finalists of both sexes -- an event noted in newspapers around the country
In the early 1960s, the judges dropped the written examinations, which had been part of the competition since its inception. That move, notes Science Service President E.G. Sherburne Jr., reaffirmed a fundamental precept of the talent search: that the creativity embodied in a research project may serve as the best predictor of future success in science.
In the decades that followed, the research projects became increasingly complex and sophisticated. Whereas earlier students made do with simple laboratory equipment or homemade devices and tackled topics such as the chemistry of making vinegar, the 1970s and '80s brought new challenges. More and more applicants began conducting their research in the laboratories of professional scientists, using such resources as electron microscopes and cyclotrons. And a new wave of immigrants came to the fore: Asian Americans.
As the talent search evolves, at least one fundamental ingredient remains constant: the support and encouragement students receive from their science teachers.
Consider, for instance, the efforts of biology instructor Richard Plass. In the 1970s, he set out to create an honors science program at New York City's Grover Cleveland High that would challenge the school's brightest students and make them and their parents think twice before opting for a better-known school such as Stuyvesant or Bronx Science.
Working with a committee of science teachers and students, Plass developed a research program based on the study of primitive critters such as euglena, paramecia and simple bacteria. The school's program, dubbed Creature Features, attracted students as early as the ninth grade. Twenty of these youths became talent search semifinalists, and in, drawing national recognition to a school not widely known for its academic excellence.
Plass himself was lured to Stuyvesant in 1982 for the position of assistant principal of biology Today, he and a team of Stuyvesant teachers oversee a series of courses known as Research for Westinghouse. The program, inspired by Creature Features, Encourages freshmen and sophomores with an appetite for research to take Double periods of biology or physics. Students give presentations on classroom research and critique each other's work.
"They're doing library work, making a hypothesis, as if it were a regular talent search project," says Plass. "But they're doing it in a ninth grade class, using the biology they're learning." By the time they enter their junior year, he says, some talented students are "ready to take on the big one -- the real contest."
Often, that means knocking on the door of a professional research laboratory And often, an older Stuyvesant student is already "We have kids teaching kids," says Arnold Bellush, a physics teacher who helps run the Stuyvesant program.
While teacher teamwork proved successful at Stuyvesant and Grover Cleveland, in other cases a school's success may trace to a single instructor. In the mid-1950s, for example, a small school in a semirural region began producing talent search winners. Students from Columbus High School in Marshfield, Wis., reached the top 40 in seven of the eight years from 1955 to 1962.
"The judges were completely flabbergasted that this little town had so many kids who could perform this way," says Schriver.
She and the judges soon found the key that had unlocked so much talent: a physics and chemistry teacher named Sister Mary Lauretta Bishop.
Before Sister Mary Lauretta joined Columbus High in 1952, becoming its first science teacher, she had taught in a Milwaukee school and had tried, without success, to produce a talent search winner.
"But when I got to. And I certainly was blessed with some wonderful students." One was Ronald E. Gates, who decided to study the chemistry of making vinegar, using some 20 natural products as different sources for the acidic compound.
The school had limited laboratory resources, and Gates collected his materials as best he could. He picked dandelions from the school's front lawn; for cattails, he visited the pond of a local farm. His teacher went with him to gather apples from a nearby orchard. Sister Mary Lauretta remembers the vivid rouge of Gates' cranberry vinegar, "as beautiful as a red wine."
Just before Christmas in 1958, Gates told her he would have to abandon the project because he wanted to earn some extra money for the holidays. A few weeks later, prodded by his father, he went back and announced he would like to continue after all. He recalls her response: "'I want you to know, I've fed your cultures, they're still I would have had to start all over again if she hadn't done that," he says.
The project earned Gates a place in the winner's circle. "I can remember riding up on the train to Washington -- all that pomp and circumstance, the telegram saying you won, the whole senior class seeing you off at the train depot. You begin to feel 'I really am special, I really am something.' Then you get there and you meet the other students, and you feel very humble."
In 1959, Sister Mary Lauretta supervised another student, Virginia Perner Fischer, who worked steadily after school for three months on a research project with which she seemed to need little help. "Then one day," says Sister Mary Lauretta, "she came in with all her paraphernalia, dumped it on the floor in front of me and said, 'I'm through.' 'Why?' I asked. 'Because you're never around need?' I asked. 'Yes,' said Virginia."
"From then on," says Sister Mary Lauretta, "I made it a point to show my face every day. And that's what she needed." Fischer became a Westinghouse winner in 1960.
"Virginia taught me a lesson that I revered because it came so spontaneously so compellingly from the heart: If you're not there with the students, guiding them in some way, even if it's only the wink of an eye, you might as well close the book. The teacher is the vital point; the teacher's presence alone is enough to stimulate," Sister Mary Lauretta says.
Last year, Ronald Gates sent a letter to his high school helper, now 90 and a resident of Notre Dame Infirmary in Elm Grove, Wis. He wrote that he had decided to give up his career as a biochemist and become a high school science teacher.
"If I can it will be terrific," he told SCIENCE NEWS.
The talent search has its critics, notes Science Service's Sherburne. "We're often accused of being elitist," he says.
That's the view taken by Bill G. Aldridge, executive director of the National Science Teacher's Association. "I feel that the search simply provides advantage to the advantaged," he says. "The last time I went to one of the Westinghouse award dinners. I sat there with a young woman who won her award in chemistry. Her mother has a Ph.D. in chemistry; her father has a Ph.D. in chemistry; her uncle got a Nobel prize in the field in which she did her work. I come away from something like that saying, 'Oh, come on.'" He adds: "Some of them are going to become outstanding scientists -- that doesn't surprise me, they probably would anyway. But you're not even touching the science education in people believe that a "genius" will thrive without any special encouragement, studies tell a different story he argues. He cites a 1982 report by Benjamin S. Bloom, an education specialist now retired from the University of Chicago and Northwestern University. Bloom examined the processes By which 25 individuals reached the highest levels of accomplishment in their fields, including mathematics, neurology swimming and tennis.
Bloom writes in Developing Talent in Young People (1985, Ballantine Books): "No matter what the initial characteristics (or gifts) of the individuals, unless there is a long and intensive process of encouragement, nurturance, education, and training, the individuals will not attain extreme levels of capability in these particular fields."
For student scientists, Sherburne maintains, the talent search has become an essential part of such nurturance and encouragement. Nina Schor, who won first place in the 1972 competition and who now studies the biology of children's cancer at the University of Pittsburgh, agrees: "At that approval and go-ahead of senior scientists was very encouraging. It gave me a sense of 'Yes, I could do it; yes, I could measure up to their standards.' It fueled the fire already inside me."
"The contest may not make people who have no initial interest in science suddenly think about it as a career," Schor says. "But for people who have an interest but who have some doubt in the back of their mind as to whether they are good enough, this program says, 'Go ahead.'" Adds Nobelist Hoffmann: "I think it encourages kids -- like any competition-to do things well, to do the things they would not have thought themselves capable of doing. I think that was how it was for me. Kids in high school are so keyed in on courses, on performance, on examination - but by focusing on a research project, you turn toward more of the reality of what science is about."
system that takes into account the socioeconomic hurdles a student may have had to endure or overcome in doing the project. "Right now, it's as if you have a race, and you're taking some kids and putting them up 20 yards from the finish line, and you're putting the other kids back 200 yards behind them. Then you have the race, and you congratulate the people who only ran 20 yards."
All students should have access to the same resources, Aldridge says. He suggests, for instance, that giving everyone the same electromagnetic or mechanical kit with instructions to build a creative device in a given amount of time might provide a fairer "hands-on" research project.
Sherburne calls such a kit "contrived," arguing that it has little to do with the way real research is conducted.
While the debate continues, student scientists keep striving. In the end, the talent search is about the young and their drive to create, discover and, who decided four years ago that her father's New Jersey junkyard was the perfect place to test an archaeological theory about the Incas. These ancient Peruvians moved massive stones in order to build their famed masonry walls. Noting that her dad's crushed junkyard cars were about the same size and weight as those stones, the 17-year-old Tu lugged the wrecks up crude, homemade ramps and built rough sledges, wooden rollers, pulleys and other tools resembling those the Incas might have used. The experiment led her to conclude that the Incas might have used beds of mud, leaves or other lubricants to ease the stone-dragging chore.
In 1987, Tu won a talent search award for her labors. At the moment, she's in China on an anthropological expedition, but she says she'll be back in Washington for the gala awards dinner on March 4.
"At the banquets, you can just see their minds dancing, and the sparkle in their eyes," says Clark of the Westinghouse Foundation, to sense that kinetic energy flying around the room."
This year, hundreds of talent search alumni will share in that exuberance as they return to Washington to celebrate the competition's 50th year.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): President Truman greets talent search finalists in 1952.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): 1989 winners display their projects to the public
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): 1991 judging panel
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Sister Mary Lauretta Bishop, a science teacher who helped produce a surge of winners from 1955 to 1962.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): President Bush addresses 1989 finalists
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Watson Davis of Science Service autographs the programs of the top two winners of 1942 - the competition's inaugural year.
PHOTO (COLOR): Winners of 1989 talent search during their visit to Washington.
By Ron Cowen
GOING PLACES Headnote Visits to Sesame Place, Busch Gardens, Water Country USA, and Kings Dominion, sandwiched around a side trip to the Baltimore Zoo and National Aquarium, proved to be fantastic family fare. // DURING THE TIME we dated and through the early years of our marriage, my wife had a hard-and-fast rule when it came to vacations: It's always better to end a trip a day too early than a day too late. On our various getaways to Hawaii, Aruba, Vermont, Maine, New Hampshire, and Florida, her advice proved wise indeed. So it was with a little bit of shock that I heard about our latest planned adventure. We were to hit the road for nine straight days -- the first and last being for travel exclusively -- working our way from New York to Pennsylvania to Maryland to, finally, Virginia, while visiting Sesame Place, the Baltimore Zoo, the National Aquarium in Baltimore, Busch Gardens, Water Country USA, and Kings Dominion. I certainly was up for such a trip, but that extent. After all, our oldest, Julie, was just four, and her younger brothers, Alex and Trevor, were three and one, respectively. Apparently, though, Margaret had done some strategic politicking with our offspring while I was at the office. They not only were all pumped up to go, daily counting down the days until our departure, but each night at the dinner table-without fail-in the weeks leading up to our vacation, the two oldest would recite our entire itinerary: listing all the places we were to go to, as well as the names of the hotels we were to stay at and the type of accommodations we were to enjoy at each, like whether it had an indoor or outdoor swimming pool, if the pools were heated, which places were suites, what nights they would be sleeping on a pull-out couch, etc. One of the concessions I had to make once we had children was that my days of going places in the off-season were over. on Earth if made to stand in long lines-I'll never understand the lure of Walt Disney World-I was resigned to my fate of exclusively summer vacations. However, since our oldest was only in prekindergarten, a late-spring vacation could still be a reality, at least for this year. The trouble is, with three water parks on the docket, we were gambling with the weather. Before June, it's common to run into not only rainy days, but cool ones. (Personally, I love the cold and the rain more than anything except a raging blizzard, but nowadays, the kids must come first.) Yet, early and mid May produced neardrought conditions in the Northeast for the first time in memory. Not only didn't a drop of rain fall, but there wasn't a cloud sighting for weeks. We left early Saturday afternoon under blue skies-that was to change drastically in less than 24 hours-for Langhorne, Pa., home of Sesame Place, the idea being to arrive at the, then get a good night's sleep so we'd be fresh, alert, and on time to the park Sunday morning. It went like clockwork. The drive turned out to be a breeze. Despite their tender years, our kids are excellent long-distance riders-no whining about the drive being too long; no grousing about each other talking or singing or playing too loudly; and, most gratifying to their parents, no asking constantly, "Are we there yet?" Moreover, we brought along the perfect insurance policy -- Video-in-a-Bag-so our trio of young travelers could watch their favorite tapes anytime they wanted. We left Julie in charge of the inventory, although it was usually Trevor, the most aggressive of our threesome, who was making the selections. I stayed in the mini-van with the kids while Margaret went to check in. It was a bit of a long wait as there were three wedding parties (and guests) coming and going at the time of our arrival. The sight of a ask what was going on. I explained that the women were on their way to a wedding, which led to a fascinating discussion in which I learned that my daughter was going to get married and be a mommy someday, but not before first being a "lady doctor" or "owning her own haircutting store." When I asked why she couldn't be a mother and a doctor or beautician, she was quite emphatic: "I don't want to do both at the same time! Being a mommy comes after I'm done with the other things." (She's since altered her career plans, and now wants to be a swimming instructor.) Photograph The Land of the Dragons play area at Busch Gardens, Williamsburg, Va., was such a big hit, it necessitated a second-day visit. Photograph The Land of the Dragons play area at Busch Gardens, Williamsburg, Va., was such a big hit, it necessitated a second-day visit. // After check-in, it great in restaurants, Trevor can be a terror. Not on this night, though. Dinner was devoured without incident, so quickly in fact that there was still time to go in the heated outdoor pool back at the hotel. Considering what awaited our three waterbugs the following day, this proved to be a good call. We were up early the next morning so we'd have time to eat breakfast, check out, and get over to Sesame Place before the park opened. We got a rude greeting upon walking to the car. It was cloudy. It was cold. It was windy. Uh-oh, Mom and Dad cringed. Undeterred by the conditions, Julie said, "That's okay; me, Alley, and Trevvy can wear our spring jackets that Mommy packed And so they did. Ah, the resilience of youth. The day at Sesame started indoors with a newly added feature, "Elmo's World Live!" Based on the popular segment from TV's "Sesame Mr. Noodle explore the concept of dance. Before the show, the ushers asked for volunteers to sit up front to join Elmo on stage. While Julie is hardly shy, she's not usually the volunteering type. Nevertheless, she was quite certain that she wanted to dance with Elmo, and dance she did, displaying not a lick of inhibition. We've been to Sesame Place before, enough times to know that even minus the pools and water rides, there is still plenty to do. Topping the list on this day was Grover's Vapor Trail, the 14-acre park's lone roller coaster. Because Sesame Place is designed for young children, it didn't even have a roller coaster until a few years ago. Vapor Trail thankfully isn't one of those new-fangled thrill rides that will shave years off your life while defying the laws of physics. It has enough dips and turns to get the kids screaming, but with delight, not out of fear. Since the chilly weather held the Trail over and over again without having to wait on line. This was especially satisfying for Alex, who all day long kept calling it the "sideways roller coaster." During past trips, he had been forced to watch his sister have all the fun while he could only stand on the sidelines. There was the requisite walk over to Sesame Neighborhood, a full-size, outdoor re-creation of the classic "Sesame Street" television set, where impromptu photo sessions with kids and their favorite characters take place. Youngsters have to run, jump, and play, too, and that's where Sesame really comes through. There are a number of non -- water park areas where kids can climb (on Cookie Mountain, a vinyl cone that participants slide down once they reach the top), bounce (on Ernie's Bed, a huge, springy air mattress that's perfect for jumping and leaping), and enjoy an assortment of slides, mazes, tunnels, ropes, sand toys, and oversized each visit is to climb the dozens of steps to the top (or face) of the Big Bird statue, where they yell down for us to take their picture while they proudly stand as if they've conquered Mt. Everest. Live shows are a key part of the Sesame Place experience. We especially enjoyed David Jack's Jungle Adventure. His CD has been a hit at our house the last few years, so seeing him live was a treat. The show is innovative and entertaining, and it's especially cute when he hands the microphone to small children who bravely sing the lyrics to his well-known songs. Hardy campers that they are, Julie and Alex insisted on trying the water rides despite the uninviting temperatures. Dad reluctantly volunteered to brave the chilly waters with them. That experiment didn't last long. For openers, Julie's favorite ride, Little Bird's Rapids, was closed because of chipping paint, so we opted for Sesame Streak, a somewhat scary descent on a two-person splash pool. Alex went first, and it was to be his only attempt of the day. The water had him shivering while the speed and blind curves had him shaking. Julie, though, liked the thrill of the quick turns. After Sesame Streak, she opted for Slippery Slope, a 75-foot slide into a splash pool. This was a mistake. I went first, so I could wait and catch her when it was her turn. I could see the fear in her eyes as she shot down the slide; then I compounded the situation by letting her slip through my arms, and under she went. Margaret quickly soothed all the frayed nerves with plenty of hugs and kisses, dried everyone off, and announced that it was time to watch the Rock Around the Block Parade in which Sesame characters such as Big Bird, Elmo, Zoe, The Count, Bert &; Ernie, Cookie Monster, Rosita, Prairie Dawn, and Telly Monster ride on floats and dance into the crowd tunes. This was a big hit, with our three yelling and pointing every time a favorite character passed by. So Dad's water follies were quickly forgotten, and the day ended on a happy note. When planning this family getaway, Margaret was faced with a problem: Water Country USA and Kings Dominion weren't open until Friday and Saturday, respectively. What to do to fill in the Monday-Tuesday gap between Sesame and our Wednesday-Thursday visit to Busch Gardens? She reasoned that, if we were going to drive all the way down to Virginia, why not find something to do along the way. A look at the atlas indicated that Baltimore would be a perfect stopover venue. With the Baltimore Zoo celebrating its 125th anniversary (it is America's third-oldest zoo), the National Aquarium located in the beautifully renovated seaport area of the city, and our kids totally fascinated by creatures on land and sea, we had the perfect transition from theme park to natural wonders and then back to theme parks I quickly suggested that we flip-flop our plans, and visit the indoor aquarium today and save the zoo for tomorrow. Margaret promptly nixed the idea, pointing out that the aquarium was a half-day event and we had a five-hour drive to Williamsburg to consider. Besides, she glumly explained, the weather forecasts were for rain up and down the East Coast for the rest of the week. We didn't say it out loud, but the silent looks we exchanged said it all: Our vacation was in danger of being a washout. The kids, though, buoyed our spirits. The rain meant nothing to them-after all, they had their jackets and umbrellas-so let's go. We had opted out of a summer vacation to avoid crowds, but when you visit a zoo, aquarium, or the like during a weekday when school is in session, there's always the danger of field trips. Despite the inclement weather, the zoo was overrun with seemingly thousands of kids. Compounding the problem was they's Zoo. Crowds of youngsters didn't deter our brood, however. They loved jumping on the oversized lily pads, climbing in and out of the spinning turtle shells, whizzing down the giant (real) tree slide, and riding the carousel. In the Farmyard, there was the usual assortment of horses, cows, pigs, sheep, and goats. Moreover, we were treated to the sight of a hatching egg, as a tiny chick slowly pecked his way out of his shell. It was like watching one of those nature programs on TV, only now it was live. Still, I sensed our crew was anticipating Photograph In Sesame Place's Rock Around the Block parade, Elmo, Big Bird, Bert &; Ernie, and many other Sesame Street characters ride on floats and dance with the crowd to 1950s rock n' roll music. // bigger game, and they'd certainly get that in the coming afternoon. After lunch, the rain slowed to a drizzle; as we explored the rest of this beautifully landscaped enclave for wildlife. The Baltimore Zoo, featuring more than 2,000 animals, takes an active role in the preservation of some of the world's most endangered creatures through several Species Survival Plan initiatives. It recently has undertaken a redevelopment program, tackling the replacement of an aging infrastructure as well as the improvement of facilities and exhibits. Currently, 80 of its 161 acres are developed. While the ambitious plans include taking various species out of cages and putting them in open areas so they have more room to roam, it still is fascinating to walk along the zoo's Main Valley, where the enclosures date from the 1800s. The polar bear, arctic foxes, snow leopards, red panda, prairie dogs, and tigers were a big hit with the kids. Although it started coming down in buckets again, the animals were blithely unaffected as they prowled their cages, eye-balling our family (their only visitors at this point) as we peered at them through'd gone through the Africa section. Since it was only drizzling at this point, we could linger while observing the cheetah, elephants, lions, warthogs, and rhinos. Two indoor exhibits were a delight as well. The Giraffe House, a unique structure, at least in our limited experience, is a circular building, where visitors walk into the center while the animals are in wooden pens that line the perimeter. Oversized picture windows allow you to see each animal's legs and body, but its upper half isn't discernible, at least until you look up and see a giraffe head sticking out into "public" space. Their bins of hay were on our side of the wall, ensuring that the hosts would come "out" to visit. The Chimpanzee Forest provided some unexpected interactive play as one of the chimps took his stick and playfully began poking it at Alex, who, if it were possible, would have gladly obliged and grabbed his end of the small wooden pole., putting on quite a show of jumping, climbing, playing, and screeching. In contrast, the crocodiles, located a few doors down, lay quiet as death, only their eyes and snouts breaking the surface of the water. Nature continued its contrary games with the weather the next day. Despite dire promises of an all-out drenching, the storms held back as a warm, muggy front moved in. Truth be told, I'd rather have been at the zoo in the rain than in the heat and humidity. At least the Aquarium was air-conditioned. Like the Baltimore Zoo, weekday mornings at the National Aquarium are madness because of local school field trips. This has been even more evident since everyone is flocking to see the spectacular exhibit, "Seahorses: Beyond Imagination." All the jostling for position was worth it, though. This astounding 2,000-square-foot display presents 10 of the world's 35 identified species of seahorses, along with weedy and leafy seadragons and several species of pipefish. Nine an elaborate sound system provide visitors with one of the most diverse presentations of seahorses ever created on the East Coast. There are tiger tail seahorses from the Philippines, potbelly ones from Southeast Australia, blue stripe pipefish from East Africa, dragonface pipefish from Indonesia, and giant Pacific seahorses from Mexico. These creatures range from less than half an inch in length to more than 12 inches tall. All you women out there should be heartened to hear that it is the male that becomes pregnant during courtship. The female deposits eggs into his brood pouch, where he fertilizes them. The young develop in the pouch. Gestation periods range from 10 to 30 days, depending on the species. (Who says men can't pull their weight?) While "Seahorses: Beyond Imagination" is only a temporary exhibit, wrapping up its two-year run in Baltimore in the spring of 2003, one of the aquarium's more permanent features is the live bottlenose dolphin show. Personally, I thought there could have been performing by the dolphins and a little less ecological talk by the narrator. Still, it was informative and the kids thoroughly enjoyed it. Photograph The inhabitants of the Chimpanzee Forest in the Baltimore Zoo put on quite a show-jumping, climbing, playing, screeching (and sometimes lounging) r-much to the delight of onlookers. Photograph The Children's Zoo, part of the Baltimore Zoo, has a number of interactive features, including shells in which kids can see what it feels like to be a turtle. // We eventually made our way to the Tropical Rain Forest, which showcased the diversity of animals and fauna found in the deepest, darkest jungles on Earth. Trouble was, after a chilly day at Sesame Place and a cool, wet visit to the zoo, Mom instinctively had the kids in long sleeves. This was fine for the mostly air-conditioned facility, but not so for a rain forest environment. We were so hot and anxious to cool down that we raced right by the tank of piranha he passed it down to me-I harbor an extreme fascination for three particular predator fish: the piranha, barracuda, and shark. In true family tradition, I had my kids all excited about seeing this trio of aquatic killers. But this aquarium has no barracuda (yes, I called to lodge my complaint), and I missed the piranha because of heat exhaustion. The aquarium has five levels. On level one, dozens of stingrays (another favorite of mine and my kids) and many small sharks can be seen from the surface or through the underwater viewing windows of the 260,000-gallon pool. The ray collection is the largest in the country. On level two, the Open Ocean, large sharks and small-toothed sawfish slowly encircle visitors inside a 225,000-gallon ringshaped tank. This was what I really had come for, as well as to see the kids' reaction to the hammerhead, the way Alex gasped at the size of their teeth, and how Julie was amazed that a fish could actually be bigger seahorses, my daughter proclaimed at the end of the day that her favorite residents at the aquarium were the harbor and gray seals located in a 70,000-gallon outdoor rock pool outside the main building. For Alex, it was a tie between the giant Pacific octopus and the electric eel. (Trevor didn't make a selection; he'd slept in a carrier on my back most of the day.) There are more than 14,000 fish and mammals representing nearly 600 species at the aquarium. Of course, the true test of diversity and interest always lies with the kids, and throughout the morning and into the early afternoon, all we heard was "Dad, quick, come look at this"; "Mommy, over here, you have to see this fish"; "Alley, hurry, see what's in this tank"; "Ju-Ju, wow, do you see that?" It became a mad scramble. They were fascinated by the creatures in each exhibit, yet couldn't one. The five-hour drive down to Williamsburg was uneventful-until we were almost there. Then, the skies opened up on the Interstate like I've rarely seen. I consider myself an excellent driver and feel confident maneuvering our vehicle through practically all conditions, but for one of the few times in my life, I was tempted to pull over and wait it out. However, visibility was so bad that I decided it would be more dangerous to be stopped on the side of the road than to inch along the highway and hope for the best. The deluge lasted only about 15 minutes, but it seemed like hours. When it suddenly stopped, we breathed a sigh of relief, but then it started again. This time, though, it didn't last as long. Still, it was a relief when we finally pulled into our hotel in what was now bright sunshine. My wife, as usual, had planned our accommodations perfectly. We were to spend eight nights away. Williamsburg was find a spacious hotel suite with two king-sized beds, a large living room, and a full kitchen. We hadn't planned to cook, but it sure was convenient to have a fridge, microwave, and dinette table, since, by this point in the trip, take-out dinners were our main evening fare. We took advantage of the laundry room across from the elevator because, even though we were on vacation, it was either do laundry or rent a trailer and fill it with kids' clothes. Moreover, a full breakfast buffet was included, which saved us plenty of time and money. (As my father-in-law used to say: "I'd rather clothe them than feed them.") Upon picking up our passes to Busch Gardens and Water Country USA the next morning, we were informed that the past four days had been a nightmare weather-wise. For the next 72 hours, at least, things would be picture-perfect with temperatures in the mid 80s, low humidity, and bright neverending list of chores: applying sunblock to the kids. Busch Gardens, with its beautifully landscaped grounds, features 17th-century European-themed sections (representing six different countries) and four wild, scary roller coasters: Apollo's Chariot, 70 mph, 210-foot drop; Alpengeist, 67 mph, 195-foot drop; Loch Ness Monster, 60 mph, the world's first interlocking, double-looping steel coaster; and The Big Bad Wolf, 48 mph, among the world's first suspended models. To thrill-seekers, I say, go forth and enjoy, as I did when I was younger and more foolish. (In 1993, I went on the Loch Ness Monster and The Big Bad Wolf. I also believe that was the year my first gray hair appeared.) On this visit, I turned pale on the Wilde Maus, a single-car roller coaster designed for kids that simulates the motion of a mouse going through a maze. To me, it simulated a car going off a sharp curve on a mountain road more. "Again, Daddy! Can we go on it again?!" I staggered to a shady bench, took a few gulps from my water bottle, and gasped, "Only if Mommy will take you." After Margaret and Julie took their turn, my wife's bemused smile said it all, "You're a big, fat chicken and a scaredy-cat." The next day, I sought to redeem myself by agreeing to another spin. As we waited on line, Julie was assuring me that it was okay to be frightened. The pair on line in front of us-a man whose girth indicated he was about the same 235 pounds I was and his young daughter-overheard Julie's pep talk. He sympathetically reported that he, too, had a few palpitations when he'd ridden it earlier. What was funny-or sensible, depending on your point of view-is, as we were about to board the four-seat car with him and his daughter, he suggested that I take the front right spot. "No sense us both sitting on the same side and tipping around one of those curves," he said, only half-kidding. Photograph Among the fascinating creatures on display at the National Aquarium in Baltimore are the bizarre leafy seadragon (left) and the aptly named longsnout seahorse. // It was Julie's turn to be shaken up on "Escape from Pompeii." She's fearless when it comes to log flumes, raft rides, and the like. In fact, the ominous-looking drop to end the ride is what appealed to her as we walked by. However, we didn't anticipate such an authentic re-creation of a volcanic eruption that preceded the finale. Even I was taken aback as stone pillars and statues crashed all around the raft and real flames shot up close enough to heat your cheeks. She was clinging to me tightly, tears welling in her big green eyes, before it was finally over. Still, she recovered quickly, and for the next couple of days, able to chide her, "So, Jules, you think we should try this one again?" She'd always return a good-sport smile before Mommy would put me in my place. "Julie will go on Pompeii again if you'll go on Wilde Maus." End of ribbing. The shops in each of the six countries -- Ireland, Germany, Italy, Scotland, England, and France-are bursting with a wonderful assortment of gifts, souvenirs, and crafted items endemic to that particular nation. When Margaret and I visited Busch Gardens eight years earlier, we'd done a lot of browsing and buying, which is really saying something because my wife is not a shopper. This time, though, we could only look longingly at the storefront displays, as having three children under five makes it nearly impossible to enter such establishments. Likewise, the ethnic food available is mouth-watering. While many parks only offer hot dogs, french fries, and maybe fried chicken, our kids were happy to of Italy. Our offspring also have an appreciation of flowers and vegetation. Each has a designated garden at home (although Dad does all the upkeep, of course), and they enjoyed seeing the vast array of colorful blooms that are everywhere. The park's landscape features more than 150,000 annuals, 80,000 tulips, 6,000 chrysanthemums, and 700 container gardens, as well as thousands of trees and shrubs. Two-dozen landscape artists spend nearly six hours a day pruning, planting, and weeding. A great way to appreciate the flowers and layout of the park is on the skyride, which traverses the park from the air. Too bad it was under repair. Instead, we had to settle for the train. The ride is not only scenic, but convenient, as at the end of each car there's a spot for strollers, and they don't even have to be emptied and folded. Shunning most of the adult rides in favor of things they could negotiate, our youngsters enjoyed a number, and hang glider and balloon rides. Still, they were willing to tackle some adult enterprises, including a log flume and white-water raft ride (Julie), teacup ride (Julie and Alex), and Le Mans Raceway (Julie, Alex, and Trevor). All three also ventured into the 4-D show, "Pirates," and all but Trevor left in tears. Too bad, because Mom and I thought the short film, about a hapless pirate crew and its wacky captain (starting Leslie Nielsen and Eric Idle), was really cool. The 3-D glasses actually worked-too well, it turned out, as the ultrarealistic scenes had the kids burying their heads in our chests. Making matters worse (or better, according to Mom and Dad), was the buzzing in our ears (from bees), the disquieting breeze in our hair (from bats), and the perceived droplets on our heads (from birds), which accounted for the 4-D appellation. Busch Gardens has Trevor to sit still for too long. We did take in "A Dragon's Tale." I suspect the kids thought it had to do with "Dragon Tales," a favorite PBS show of theirs. Nevertheless, they seemed to enjoy it, and all remained calm since Trevor was napping in the stroller. A favorite spot both days was Land of the Dragons, a play area with rope-climbing, slides, sprinklers and chutes. On our second visit, I managed to lose Alex when Margaret left for just a few minutes to go change Trevor's diaper. She returned to find me mildly panic-stricken. (The topography was such that he couldn't have left the area without passing by me, yet I still couldn't find him.) Margaret told me to calm down and take Trevor. A couple of minutes later, she returned with Alex. Even without being there, she knew exactly where he was based on his exploits the day before. You got ta love a mother the Wilde Maus roller coaster at Busch Gardens is capable of creating plenty of palpitations for adult riders as well, especially when it hits those hairpin curves, much like a car negotiating a mountain road. Photograph Escape from Pompeii at Busch Gardens is designed to terrorize viewers with a surprisingly realistic re-creation of a volcanic eruption, including shooting flames and crashing pillars. // The two days at Busch seemed to disappear before we knew it. Although the time flew by, these were long days that entailed a lot of walking. So after dinner and a dip in the hotel pool, we were all ready for an early bedtime. Friday turned out to be the pinnacle of the week as the kids finally had their day in the sun at a water park. We had bookended the trip with venues (Sesame Place and Kings Dominion, respectively) that had water rides contained within the larger theme park. You already know what happened at Sesame, and we'll get to the Kings Dominion story later on. this is where we spent 99.9% of our time. We set up morning shop at Cow-A -- Bunga, a 4,500-square-foot pool replete with water slides and falls, gushing fountains, water cannons, and an assortment of interactive activities. It was heaven on Earth for the kids. Since there was 100% visibility from poolside, all we had to do was pull up a lounge chair and watch. Trevor, 20 months old at the time, was going through a stage where only Daddy would do. He refused to stay in the stroller, instead demanding that his father lug him around everywhere. It actually was quite funny because, unlike his older siblings, when Trevor first came home from the hospital after his birth, he'd have nothing to do with me. In fact, he was sure to cry-quite vociferously -- if I held him. Neighbors, friends, family, even strangers would get nuzzled, and Dad would get an earful of screaming. Anyway, my youngest's new attitude finally worked Trev is about 11 a.m. He'd been shortchanged all week trying to nap in a stroller in which he couldn't stretch out fully, but situated in an oversized reclining lounge in the shade, he slipped into a restful, deep sleep. Since I'd carried him around endlessly all week, Margaret left me to loll in the chair next to him, and for two and a half hours, neither of us moved. It was quite pleasant. When he finally rose, we were overdue for a late lunch, so we hustled over to the picnic tables alongside another children's area, Kid's Kingdom. After devouring their meal, the kids were ready to return to their aquatic activities. Kid's Kingdom proved a ball, thanks to the scaled-down water slides, play equipment, and fountains. While Trevor and I returned to Cow-A -- Bunga, Julie and Alex decided to brave the wave pool with Mom. Not surprisingly, Alex was escorted back to us in tears. It was free to return to the Surfer's Bay Wave Pool, while Alex and Trevor had a blast on the water slides directly in front of my lounging area. When the family reunited, we decided to try the lazy river. The tubes were big enough for Julie to ride with Mom, while Trevor and Alex got a kick out of perching on Dad's big belly during a meandering float around the area. Still ahead, though, was H20 UFO, Water Country's largest interactive play area. An array of slides, spray jets, and waterfalls had Julie and Alex squealing with delight. As usual, I was on the sidelines with Trevor while Mom joined her two oldest in the water. Once again, we were going to close the park, thus living up to our motto: Come early, stay late. Then, as a portent of what awaited us tomorrow, the skies suddenly darkened and a rumbling sound filled the air. Even after hard drops began, the kids insisted on wonderland to end. Finally, we were able to persuade all three-Trevor was in up to his waist by this time-that it indeed was time to go. No sooner did we get them out of the water when the downpour began in earnest-not that it mattered, since we were all in bathing suits. Although we hardly needed confirmation, we knew the day was a smashing success when Julie announced that we could skip the hotel pool tonight, not due to the rain (it had stopped by then), but because they'd spent enough time in the water already. Photograph At Water Country USA, youngsters can enjoy an assortment of fun-filled pool activities, including tube chutes in which an adult is not needed. // About 50 miles from Williamsburg is Doswell, Va., home to Kings Dominion, the 400-acre Paramount theme and water park and our final stop before heading home to New York. We had hoped to end the vacation on a high note, and we did, but only because of the poured, poured, poured -- and then poured some more. All day. All the time. No letup. No exaggeration. The kids? They couldn't have cared less. True, they'd have liked to have splashed around WaterWorks, the 19-acre water park that's part of the Kings Dominion lot, but with the previous day still fresh in their minds, no water park turned out to be no sweat. Still, Margaret and I couldn't help but be impressed with their attitude. Not a single complaint (I swear) about the rain-and it was a cold rain, too. We kept them covered with umbrellas and the stroller hood as best we could; toweled off their sopping seats on each of the rides; and bought them ponchos to go over their coats and hats. After a while, though, it became pointless because there simply was no letup. With all three drenched from head to toe, we held a quick family meeting. Mom and I offered to our new hotel or start home for New York. Julie and Alex wouldn't hear of it. They pleaded for more rides. Trevor, who wasn't speaking in sentences at the time, agreed with his brother and sister, chiming in, "Stay! Stay!" Okay, then. It was back to the Kidzville section, where all 14 rides saw double or triple duty. The Taxi Jam Coaster held Alex's attention all day. He'd ride it a couple of times; try something else; then come back for another spin or two. And so it went. The popular ride for Julie was the Scooby-Doo Ghoster Coaster, one of those old-time wood coasters. She always chose the front or last car for optimum thrills. Scooby-Doo is the tamest of Kings Dominion's 11 world-class roller coasters. The newest, which opened this year, is the most incredible, unbelievable amusement park attraction I've ever seen. The HyperSonic XLC is the world's first air -- launched roller mph in 1.8 seconds) of any ride in the world. Its angle of descent (180) is also unmatched. Riders ascend a 165-foot-tall vertical tower at a 180 angle. Then it's over the top (no pun intended) as the coaster descends straight down! Julie, Alex, and I watched all this from the top of the Eiffel Tower, a 332-foot replica of the Parisian monument. The entire park is visible from there and, kids being kids, they got as much a kick out of spotting our car in the parking lot as they did spying all 11 roller coasters and the rides they'd just enjoyed in Kidzville. A present we gave Julie for her fourth birthday proved valuable when we descended the tower and made our way to Nickelodeon Central and the Rugrats Toonpike. There, kids drive an electric automobile (that's not on any sort of a track) while cruising through the Rugrats neighborhood. The streets are replete with stoplights, a gas station, and traffic signs electric car back home, our daughter was easily the best driver each of the four times she climbed behind the wheel. This skill also served her (and Alex) well later that evening. After Alex and Trevor went through Meet Blue a couple of times-an interactive adventure in which you follow several clues to solve the day's puzzle before going into Steve's house, where Nickelodeon TV icon Blue awaits-it was almost dinnertime, and lo and behold a miracle-the rain stopped. Since the park stayed open late, we didn't have to get up early the next morning, it was the last day of vacation, and the kids were all for it, we decided to eat dinner there, take everyone out to the car for a set of dry clothes, and return to enjoy a few more rides. So back we went to explore some unchartered territory in the park, only this time under clear, cool skies. After trying the Carousel, Log Flume (twice), Antique Cars, and pick one more ride apiece. Alex chose the Top Cat Taxi, while Julie selected the kiddie bumper cars. At Busch Gardens, our oldest showed both poise and ruthlessness in (successfully) going after other cars. (I taught her well.) Alex, however, couldn't get the hang of it, and inevitably got stuck in some corner. "I just can't do it, Dad!," he cried, tears of frustration rolling down his cheeks. Nevertheless, I convinced him to take another shot that night at Kings Dominion. Same teary results. That's when commonsense Mom stepped in, suggesting that, instead of putting them in separate cars, they should go together, with Alex riding shotgun. "Now we'll do some real bumping, right Alley?," said Julie, repeating my oft-spoken phrase from whenever I took her on the adult bumper cars. Our dynamic duo proved a formidable team. With Alex now relieved of the pressure of working the gas his sister toward a succession of automotive victims. He pointed with obvious relish at one car after another, and his heavy-footed sister showed no mercy as she skillfully bobbed and weaved through traffic to accomplish her mission. It was also mission accomplished on our exhausting, but wonderfully memorable, vacation. (As it turned out, my wife's rule went by the boards. This trip was neither too long nor too short. It was just right.) Margaret had started a great little tradition when Trevor first began to talk. After any family outing-the beach, playground, Nana's house, etc. -on the ride home, she'd ask, "Who had fun today?" A resounding chorus of "M-e-e-e-e-e!" would inevitably follow. We'd done it each day of this vacation, with the same positive result. As we headed for the Interstate (and home) the next morning, she posed the question one more time. "So, who had fun on our vacation?" practically blew the roof off our mini-van. It was a sweet sound, indeed. * Photograph Youngsters exhibit their driving skills, as well as bumping aggression, in cars that are not attached to any sort of track on the Rugrats Toonpike at Kings Dominion, Doswell, Va. Author Affiliation Wayne M. Barrett is Managing Editor of USA Today. //

The Inns of Court are headquarters to an antique legal system whose practitioners are now embroiled in Britain's' Bar Wars'
"And did not your own mother say that when she heard of what you had done to your brother she thought she would faint dead away?"
"I did nothing illegal," said the sullen defendant.
It was my first visit to the Victorian-Gothic caverns of London's Law Courts, and up to this point it might have been a scene being acted out in any courtroom in the world. The judge and the lawyers wore white wigs turned gray in service and somber black gowns, but the case they were conducting was a case like any other, a sordid squabble over a bit of financial skulduggery in Yorkshire.
With the next question by counsel for the plaintiff, it became uniquely English.
"And did not your closest business associate say that when he was informed of what you had done to your brother, he felt, to use his own expression, gobsmacked."
But his counsel, paying no attention to him, was already on his feet. "I believe," he said, "that my learned friend will find that the term used on this occasion was more likely to have been 'gobstruck.'"
The judge, who had been impassively taking notes, leaned forward now, his face crinkling with curiosity."'Gobstruck,'" he said, testing each syllable on his tongue, "what a curious expression. Would it be American?"
"I submit with great respect to your Lordship," said and beleaguered, don carry on counsel for the defendant, "that its origin is more likely to be found in the north of England."
"I suggest to my learned friend," suggested counsel for the plaintiff, "that it may rather derive from Ireland."
And for the next few minutes the bitter brothers from Yorkshire were quite forgotten, and we might imagine ourselves transported from the in an ancient college where three learned gentlemen in black gowns were chattering wittily about etymology.
Then it stopped as abruptly as it had started, and we were back racing through the testimony of the defendant.
"Racing" is a word that comes automatically to mind, at least to the mind of any foreigner who attends an English trial. The law's delays have been proverbial in England since at least Prince Hamlet's day, but they can often be laid at the door of the solicitors, the lawyers who prepare the case in Britain's higher courts. Once it comes to the courtroom, the trial is the domain of barristers, and they usually proceed with verve and skill and dispatch. The reason is simple: almost everything in an English civil trial is oral. Perhaps this reflects a national trait- "We English," as one bland barrister puts it, "would rather listen and talk than read and think." At all events, there is little sign of the trials. Far more is done by word of mouth-opening statements, examination of witnesses, closing statements. In most cases, the moment the lawyers have stopped talking the judge starts to utter, not read, his decision. If the losing side is dissatisfied, it can take the case to a court of appeal, which is perfectly capable of listening to oral arguments and settling the matter with an oral decision.
Clearly it must take special training as well as special talents to make a system like this work satisfactorily; it can hardly be improvised. There is a rumor that one brilliant trial judge in New York began to imitate the English style of giving immediate judgment, but he was warned off it by the appellate court for fear that other judges would try it too and make utter fools of themselves.
Though it has been under violent attack at home in recent years, the British legal system has always enjoyed enormous prestige abroad. It relies on rules of conduct that have been refined slowly have every detail of the case at their fingertips. They have to be able to think quickly on their feet. They have to be masters of wordplay. The judge has to be able to keep a running rational summary in his mind of all the complexities of fact and law filling the air in front of his bench. Lawyers and judges alike have to understand the nuances of the language they speak so that they can dispose of matters like the credibility of evidence with a few words, sometimes an unspoken nod. They can do it so smoothly because they are all, In effect, members of one great cozy club. In the higher court system of England and Wales, where all serious crimes are judged, and all civil suits involving more than o5,000 (soon to be o25,000), all trial lawyers and judges are required to be barristers, that is, they must have been "called to the Bar." There is, and for the past 400 years has been, only one is to join an Inn of Court. There are four of these Inns, 11 in Central London: Inner Temple, Middle Temple, Lincoln's Inn and Gray's Inn, each jealous of its sepaate traditions but all with a common view of the duties and prerogatives of the Bar.
In the old days the Inns provided all the legal instruction necessary, not in formal classes but by continual contact between students and their learned elders, mostly in the great communal dining rooms, listening and talking about cases and precedents while the claret and the port went round. A student who was judged to have soaked up enough learning after a few years was summoned to step up to the Bar, which was originally a wooden barrier marking off the part of the hall reserved for the exclusive use of "the benchers," or senior members of the Inn. From that moment on, the candidate was authorized to practice before the higher courts of England and Wales.
Modern bureaucratic times have changed the take regular courses in torts and evidence and pass official examinations. But you still can not become a barrister without having taken at least 24 meals over a two-year period at your Inn. In practice, everyone takes more meals than that, both because they are cheap and because they provide a way of slipping painlessly into the community of the Bar. Aspiring barristers once formed a tightly knit group of young men from upper-class families who had gone to Oxford or Cambridge. Today, a liberal scholarship policy insures that they will come from all up and down the social scale and from all kinds of Redbrick universities. And almost a third of them are women. No matter. By the time they have been through an Inn of Court they all speak with the same snuffling, snorting Oxonian drone, they have all adapted themselves to the tone of the English courtroom, which an American judge, Benjamin Kaplan, has defined as "informality within a formal setting."
Physically speaking, the Inns are four choice land north of the Thames on both sides of Fleet Street where it meets the Strand. Lawyers are said to have begun congregating there in the 14th century, renting some quarters for o1O a year in buildings that had belonged to the Order of the Knights Templars before it was dissolved by King Edward 11. It was a shrewd choice, for it lay halfway between the center of financial power in the City and the center of political power in Westminster. Medieval London was subject to periodic assaults by rebels such as Jack Cade, who led a mob into town in 1450 shouting nasty things like "Death to all lawyers!" The canny lawyers laid low, though at times this meant more than just rising above the epithets. In one incident, they had to watch as the deeds and records of the Temple buildings went up in smoke. They went on squatting there, and by the next century, in the time of the Tudors, they had come to be recognized as legal owners of organized themselves as corporate entities, self-governing and self -supporting and eventually very rich. Gradually, too, they gathered unto themselves the monopoly of preparing young hopefuls for the Bar. All the great judges and advocates and legal philosophers who have created the extraordinary fabric of the English law passed through the Inns. So did many others whose names shine brightly in the political and cultural life of the nation. Sir Thomas More and Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Raleigh and Shakespeare's Sir John Falstaff, Sir Francis Bacon and John Donne, Sir William Blackstone and William Penn and William Pitt, Boswell and Fielding and Sheridan and De Quincey and Lamb and Thackeray and Macaulay, King Edward VII, Margaret Thatcher and, of course, Rumpole of the Bailey all took their meals at an Inn of Court. So did five signers of the American Declaration of Independence; Mohandas K. Gandhi (disbarred in 1922 after being convicted of sedition in India but formally reinstated in the rolls of the Inner Temple in 1988); as.
Walled off from the roaring traffic of the Embankment and Fleet Street and High Holborn, each Inn is self-centered community with its own gardens, lush with cherry and magnolia, camelia and crocus; its own library; its own dining hall; its labyrinth of walks and lawns; its blocks of offices and flats let out mostly to barristers. Tourists still line up to see the rooms where Dr. Johnson lived and pontificated two centuries ago.
The English have always believed, with some reason, hat their institutions are quite unlike those of other nations. They were not created, like those of the Russians, by the ukase of autocrats, or like those of the French, by unbridled human reason. They have grown slowly, haphazardly, absentmindedly but shrewdly. The rolling English drunkard, boasted Chesterton, made the rolling English road. just so with the Inns of Court, which are the product of uncoordinated but surprisingly harmonious growth over the centuries. Certainly no sober man, starting from scratch system, which entrusts decisions in all criminal cases in the higher courts to 12 citizens chosen specifically because they know nothing about the matter in hand. Yet the world recognizes it as one of the glories of England, and of the United States and other countries that have borrowed it from England.
Sometimes the roll becomes a lurch, and the system has to correct itself. The Lord Chancellor's Court (Chancery) was created to provide a quicker, fairer way through the tangle of precedents and technicalities that were delaying justice in other courts. By the 19th century it had itself become so encrusted with its own technicalities, so afflicted with monstrous delays, that Dickens could write in Bleak House that it "exhausts finances, patience, courage, hope, overthrows the brain and breaks the heart." Toward the end of the century it was abolished as an independent entity and absorbed into the regular court system, where it functions at the same speed as any other. Crusader effigies; clicking computers effigies of Crusaders lying stiffly on their tombs, and next door computers are clicking away in the more up-to-date offices. The hammer-beams of the roof in the dining hall of the Middle Temple looked down on the first performance of Shakespeare's Twelfth Night in February 1602. When the producers wanted an authentic 18th-century background for the movie version of Henry Fielding's Tom Jones, they simply cleared the cars out of King's Bench Walk in the Inner Temple so Squire Western and his friends driving up in their carriages could feel completely at home.
The horsehair wigs that barristers wear date back only to the 1840s, when they replaced the old model made of human hair, which had to be periodically recurled. It is now a rite of passage for the fledgling barrister to have his or her skull measured at Ede &; Ravenscroft on Chancery Lane for the wig that will stay in place for a lifetime of courtroom oratory. (Lawyers on this side of the Atlantic might still be wearing them had not Thomas Jefferson that they made English lawyers look like "rats peeping through bunches of oakum.")
On the other hand, the tradition that the benchers of Lincoln's Inn may drink the sovereign's health without rising to their feet goes all the way back to 1660 when they were joyously welcoming King Charles 11 home from his travels, with such joy and on such unsteady legs that the gracious monarch told them, "Gentlemen, you may sit."
"Gentlemen," he called them, for barristers have always been just that. In the rigid class structure of old England, being called to the Bar was one of the few ways an ambitious young man from the lower orders could rise quickly and safely up the social ladder. In 1880 a father wrote to his son who was pondering a choice of careers that, while he would not oppose his turning to mercantile pursuits if he insisted, "it would be a great comfort to me, and to those who love you, that" The young man went on to become Sir Edward Marshall Hall, the most successful and flamboyant of trial lawyers in the early 20th century.
One of the peculiarities of the English higher court system is its division of lawyers into the two classes of barristers and solicitors, with the former arguing the cases and the latter doing nearly everything else. There has never been any doubt, though, as to which outranks the other. The time has passed when solicitors had to use the tradesmen's entrance while barristers could walk in the front door. Young barristers are no longer given a manual of conduct warning them against the consequences of too much social intercourse with solicitors' clerks. But a touch of the old distinctions lingers on. A barrister almost never sets foot in a solicitor's office; it is usually the solicitor who brings his client around to the barrister's chambers. The solicitor negotiates and collects a fee like any other businessman, while the barrister would be made acutely uncomfortable by the mere gown a symbolic fold forming a little pouch in which grateful clients once slipped pieces of gold as honoraria that would not sully his hands. He does of course get paid, but all that side of things is handled by his clerk.
In the higher courts, the solicitor does the background and the paperwork. He prepares the case, tracks down and examines witnesses, collects and weighs the facts, and "briefs," or hires, a barrister who he believes can handle the case properly. Today there are about 6,500 barristers in England, compared with 45,000 solicitors. Barristers live in a different world; they are members of a small caste whose closest approximations are the samurai of old Japan. Like the samurai, a barrister has been exhaustively trained for one thing and one thing only, to fight for hire. His main function is to appear in court for his client. He is handed the necessary facts by the solicitor. He does not see witnesses till they take the stand. his client till the day the trial starts.
Solicitors generally form partnerships. The barrister is a lone gun, an independent operator. He does team up with others to form what are called chambers, usually but not invariably with offices in an Inn of Court. The members split expenses and the services of a clerk, but they can conceivably find themselves on opposite sides of the same case. For barristers, by long custom, operate on what is called the cab-rank rule, which means they must take whatever case is offered them. Of course, as one barrister told me, "There are cab ranks and cab ranks. There are the Volkswagen kinds and there is my kind, which is more on the order of Rolls Royce." But the rule remains that if the solicitor comes with a brief that is within his area of expertise, and if his time is not already booked, and if the fee that his clerk demands can be met, then the barrister must take the himself on either side of a larcenous mess in Yorkshire. He may find himself prosecuting a bank robber for the Crown, or defending an IRA terrorist against the Crown. All he has to do is to fight as well as he can.
It is only natural for people brought up in this tradition to feel a certain pride when they step forward in lonely battle clad in the majesty of the law, and there is more than genteel self-mockery involved when they cite the lines they all know by heart, sung by the Lord Chancellor in the Iolanthe of W S. Gilbert (of Inner Temple): "The Law is the true embodiment / Of everything that's excellent. / It has no kind of fault or flaw, / And 1, my Lords, embody the Law."
These sentiments are not shared by everybody. For most of this century, the English legal system has been increasingly under attack at home for being antiquated, inefficient, unjust. The Bar especially has been periodically introduces reforms, broadens its membership, tries to make its services more easily available. But the critics always say the reforms are too timid. Government after government has set up commissions to examine the structure of the legal system. They have introduced many modifications and innovations, but they have all left untouched the two main pillars of the system-the division between barristers and solicitors, and the independent status of each barrister on his cab rank.
In recent years, however, the system has shown signs of strains and cracking from within. In fact, in England these days people speak of the "Bar Wars."
It began with a great error in judgment made in the last century. The solicitors, organized in the Law Society, managed to secure for themselves a monopoly on what is called conveyancing, that is, all the paperwork, title search, etcetera, connected with the buying and selling of a piece of real estate. This is a comparatively easy and highly profitable form of than they might have been in exploring other areas.
The result was that by the late 20th century they discovered that much of the business-related work that makes fortunes for American lawyers-taxes, for instance-had slipped out of their hands into those of the giant accounting firms. This was bad enough. But then people began wondering in public just what justification there was for the conveyancing monopoly at all. Surely accounting firms, real estate agents and banks could do the work just as well, and perhaps more efficiently and more cheaply.
If they lost their monopoly, the solicitors of England might lose a third to a half of their income. Where were they to turn? One obvious place was the barrister's traditional turf. Why, after all, should only people who had taken meals at the Inns of Court have the right to appear in the upper courts? They claimed to have a special expertise in forensic tactics and courtroom skills. But the fact is that more than 90 percent of civil actions presided over by magistrates or justices of the peace (who are mostly unpaid and untrained in the law, and form another of the curious glories of the English system). And in the lower courts solicitors can and do appear alongside barristers, examining witnesses like them, arguing like them, citing the same precedents. Why preserve an artificial barrier that had no real justification but its old age? Why not take the logical step of fusion, merging solicitors and barristers in one united order of attorneys?
Labor governments might have been expected to push for fusion in accordance with their leveling principles, but Labor governments came and went with no basic change. The attack when it came was from a totally unexpected quarter, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher. Mrs. Thatcher believed in free and open competition and hated restrictive practices of all kinds. In her eyes the Bar and the Law Society were not so much upholders of immemorial tradition as they were trade unions enforcing a closed shop that artificially hiked up the Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, presented a Green Paper, a proposal for legislation "for securing a better and more cost-effective service to the public from lawyers and the courts." Contingency fees, a historic first
Lord Mackay is a Scot, brought up in a land with a different legal system from that of England and Wales. Unhampered by tradition, he called for more radical changes than any of the lawyers of England had seen in 700 years. The Green Paper proposed that the solicitors' monopoly on conveyancing be definitively wiped out. Solicitors would be allowed, having passed tests of their skill in advocacy, to appear in the higher courts, even to become judges there. So would others, including paralegals, if they had the necessary qualifications. Barristers would no longer be required to operate out of chambers. They need no longer be independent operators but might form partnerships with other barristers, or with solicitors, bankers, businessmen.
The job of setting professional standards and overseeing professional Law Society or the Council of the Bar, but would be shared with an Advisory Committee with 15 members, 8 of them nonlawyers. Barristers would be allowed to seek out clients directly, and sue them if they didn't pay, without waiting for solicitors to handle things. And for the first time in English history, lawyers would be permitted to take cases on a contingency fee.
Lord Mackay knew these were all controversial, but he must have been gobstruck by the howl of outrage that went up, not just from barristers who saw their whole way of life threatened with meltdown, but from all over the social and political spectrum. The furor crystallized in a memorable debate in the House of Lords. Stripped of all real political power in this egalitarian century, the Lords still have their pomp and their prestige and know how to make themselves listened to. Many of them are distinguished judges and lawyers, and among them sit the nine or so Law Lords who form the Court of Last They have always seen themselves as the last line of defense of English liberties, whether against the tyranny of kings or the tyranny of the majority expressed by the House of Commons.
On an April Friday, they rallied round the liberties of the Bar. They remained in session from 9 in the morning till almost 11 at night-no other crisis in English society, it was noted, had ever been able to delay the start of a weekend like this-noble lord and lady rising after noble lord and lady to bait and berate and blast the Lord Chancellor as he sat imperturbable on the woolsack. For every one or two who defended him, like Viscount Bledisloe, who refused to drop a tear over those "somnolent anachronisms," the Inns of Court, there were a dozen to savage the Green Paper.
"A mass of claptrap," said Lord Hutchinson of Lullington. Swatting "a fly on our foreheads with a pickax," said the Earl of Onslow, warming to his subject; shoe my horse. "Why should standards be lower for lawyers than for blacksmiths? Detail by detail they tore it apart and attacked its basic concept of making the legal profession cost-effective. An institution that has developed slowly and subtly over 700 years, said Lord Hailsham, can not be treated like a corner grocery store. The independence of the law was at stake, they said.
The Lord Chancellor proposed to put the legal profession under the administrative control of the Advisory Committee; many lords thought the committee should more appropriately be called a Quango. This unpleasant word, which stands for Quasi-Autonomous Non-Governmental Organization, was invented by the Tories to describe the entities set up after World War 11 by Labor governments to assist the state in its bureaucratic tasks. Any Quango that would rule the law would destroy the foundations of the country. "The Green Paper," said Lord Beloff, "suggests using one pillar of the British Constitution, namely parliamentary sovereignty, to overthrow the other pillar... the rule system."
This argument struck a deeply responsive chord in the English psyche. The average Englishman's direct experience with the law is apt to be sordid and unpleasant, involving things like traffic accidents and petty larcenies. His opinion of lawyers is not necessarily high (the Earl of Onslow pointed out that of the nine references to lawyers in the Oxford Book of Quotations, not one is complimentary), but at the back of his mind he is aware that law and lawyers are necessary to his freedom. They are there today as they were on a Sunday in 1670 when William Penn and William Mead were arrested for "causing an unlawful and tumultuous assembly" by preaching in the middle of Gracechurch Street. When the jury hearing the case found them not guilty, the judge ordered it to change the verdict, and when the jurors refused he had them locked up "all night without meat, drink, fire or other accommodation; they had not so much as a chamber-pot, though desired. and locked up again till one of them took a plea of habeas corpus to the Court of the King's Bench, and there Mr. justice Vaughan established for all time that a defendant acquitted by an English court must be set free.
Arbitrary power is not necessarily a thing of the past. England has no written constitution, and no Supreme Court in the American sense. There is nothing to prevent a majority of the House of Commons from voting any law it wants and then creating an apparatus of commissions and boards to administer it. The modern state is crammed with such bodies continually issuing orders to private citizens. Generally the private citizen can do little about it, except that by longstanding tradition judges have a right to intervene. The High Court judges of England are appointed by the government, but they are all brought up in the fiercely independent tradition of the Bar. Once appointed they can be removed only by a vote of both houses of Parliament, and the only one ever so removed Admiralty in Ireland, dismissed in 1830 for appropriating o922 to his own use.
In 1946, demobilized soldiers applying for disability pensions were told by the Ministry of Pensions that they had to prove that their disabilities had been caused by their service in the armed forces. Some of the soldiers went to law, and Mr. justice Denning told the Ministry that the burden of proof was on it to show that the disabilities were not service-related. When the Ministry said that the time limit for filing applications had run out, Denning told it to extend the time limit. The Ministry obeyed.
In the long run, such memories were too strong even for Mrs. Thatcher's government, and it backed down. The final bill to reform the legal system passed through the House of Commons just before she fell from power last year. But it was only a pale reflection of the original Green Paper. Some of its more sensible features are still left-the conveyancing monopoly, for example, is finished. The Advisory courts. A very limited form of contingency fee will be permitted as well. Barristers will not be forced into partnerships, they will remain lone warriors as in the past. The Advisory Committee will codify professional standards, subject to veto by senior judges. Especially now, because of a few recently celebrated cases in which justice was flagrantly miscarried, there is public agitation for quick reforms. But the judges can probably be counted on to make sure that whatever changes come will be gradual, practical, English. The road of the law will go on rolling into the future the way it has for 700 years.
By Robert Wernick
Section: U.S. News; Cover story Creeping paralysis has also become a fact of life in many statehouses
Most Americans can't remember the names of their own state legislators, much less be bothered to worry about lawmakers in other states. But then, most Americans have never heard of California Assemblyman Pat Nolan. A heavyset Republican from affluent Glendale, Nolan in 1982 sponsored a deregulation of California-chartered savings and loans so sweeping that it made Washington's thrift decontrol look like a straitjacket. Thanks to Nolan's law - and similar ones passed in Texas, Florida, Arizona and elsewhere - state-chartered thrifts are responsible for about two thirds of the staggering S &L; bailout.
Once political nobodies, America's 7,546 state legislators are becoming pivotal players in the country's economy and politics. They control not only congressional redistricting but a host of national issues, from welfare reform to abortion. Much of that influence has been inherited from a federal government stymied by deficits and interest groups. Unfortunately, statehouses from Albany to Honolulu are starting to suffer the same ills. in "serious fiscal difficulty," according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. A growing number of legislators are in jail or under investigation for possible corruption. And a new culture of careerism and interest-group money is evolving - a culture, says political scientist and Michigan State Senator William Sederburg, that "makes it nearly impossible for legislators to make tough political decisions." These flaws will only get worse this fall, as state legislators from both parties, eager to control congressional redistricting, stockpile record amounts of special-interest money for their 1990 campaigns.
Thirty years ago, the average state legislator was a low-paid part-timer who did something else for a living (as do legislators today in smaller states such as Vermont and South Dakota). Lacking much in the way of personal staff or independent campaign organizations, these citizen-legislators were dominated by legislative leaders and governors who controlled patronage machines. During the 1960s and 1970s, all that began to change. Legislators in the major states became well paid, full-time professionals independence from governors and political-party bosses. Legislative staffs mushroomed, giving state lawmakers more control over both issues and agendas.
For instance, 20 years ago only the executive branch had the computers and staff members to run complex budget projections. Today, budget committees and even individual lawmakers have that ability. "Information is power, and we've institutionalized that power," says Sederburg. This sophistication coincided with Ronald Reagan's New Federalism, which gave states more responsibility for everything from repairing bridges to cleaning up the environment.
For a while, the states seemed to rally to the challenge, acting as the "laboratories of democracy," that Justice Louis Brandeis once labeled them. While Washington dithered, states like New York and Oregon succeeded in passing tough pollution-control laws and no-frills medicare coverage for the uninsured.
But as the policy action shifted from Capitol Hill to statehouses, so too did big-money influence. In Georgia, for instance, the legion of lobbyists quadrupled from 280 in 1970 to 1,019 state-level lobbyists in America - 5.7 lobbyists for every legislator, according to an Associated Press survey.
Meanwhile, the decentralization of leadership has made consensus harder to build and easier to shatter. Commanding a majority on any issue is "difficult at best," admits Illinois Senate President Philip Rock, one of the country's more powerful legislative leaders. It takes longer to pass a law in a state legislature today than 10 years ago, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Yet the number of bills considered by all state legislatures, about 200,000 annually, has remained about the same, and legislatures have 40 percent more staff to help them.
The fractured power structure has made it easier for lobbyists in some states to pass their preferred bills. In the last days of the 1987 session in California, for instance, the tobacco industry slipped in a never debated amendment indemnifying itself from product-liability suits. In other states, lobbyists have more difficulty passing bills but less trouble killing them. Prof. such lobbying organizations "veto groups."
Critics contend that an epidemic of timidity aggravates the paralysis. Well-paid, full-time legislators naturally fear losing re-election by offending interest groups more than did their part-time predecessors. "They have no other profession besides the Legislature," complains New York Governor Mario Cuomo of the new breed. "They can not afford to lose."
Lobbyists prey on this fear with the threat of stirring up grass-roots opposition - and also of withholding money. State legislators need lobbyist money for the same reason congressmen need it: Rising campaign costs. Where legislators once threw $10-a-ticket barbecues for voters in their home districts as a way of generating campaign funds, today it is $200-a-plate dinners for lobbyists in the capital. Pennsylvania State Senator Craig Lewis recalls spending a then hefty $37,000 on his first successful campaign in 1974, a campaign he ran by himself, "literally out of my rec room." By the time of his most recent race in 1986, Lewis had turned gauge the political views of individual voters in his district. Computers then sent slick, tailored direct-mailers to those voters. Lewis's cost: $190,000, a 500 percent increase over his 1974 spending. According to a National Conference of State Legislatures survey, campaign costs doubled from 1982 to 1988. Spending on all state races reached $500 million in 1988, says USC's Alexander, who estimates that this year's cost will reach $1 billion.
The predictable result of all this special-interest cash and legislative career-mindedness is lawmakers who can not be dislodged. During the 1960s, one third of all state legislative seats turned over every electoral season. In 1988, only 16 percent changed hands. Incumbents win by bigger margins today, too.
'It's Washington writ small,' complains Thomas Kean, who served New Jersey both as a state legislator and as governor. He, like other critics, insists that states haven't reached Washington's level of dysfunction. True enough, though citizens of Massachusetts and may not agree. The overall trend does not inspire confidence. In major areas of public policy, states are showing signs of what Alan Rosenthal of Rutgers University's Eagleton Institute of Politics calls "creeping paralysis." Some examples:
No-fault auto insurance. Acclaimed by economists and motorists alike as the best way to settle claims and keep insurance premiums low, it continues to flounder in state legislatures. Blame it on the trial lawyers, whose PAC's consistently rank among the top funders of state-office campaigns. Of the 16 versions of auto-no-fault that lawmakers passed in the 1970s, all but three were riddled with counterproductive loopholes that in effect let no-fault policyholders retain the right to sue. Auto-insurance rate increases slowed only in Michigan, New York and Florida, the three states that passed tighter no-fault laws.
A second wave of no-fault bills, brought on by skyrocketing premiums in the 1980s, fared no better. No-fault died in committee in California in 1986, thanks to the legislative handiwork of Assembly Speaker Willie after three attempts, Pennsylvania's Legislature managed to strengthen its no-fault law. But even State Senator Craig Lewis, who voted for the law, admits it contains holes "trial lawyers will be able to drive trucks through."
Prison reform. For years, prison officials have begged lawmakers to expand prison industries, which put convicts to work making everything from license plates to circuit boards. Taxpayers, they argue, gain when prisoners pay for some of their own upkeep. So do inmates, who learn skills while earning pocket money - part of which can be docked for child support or victims' compensation. Guards and wardens benefit, too, because boredom and idleness among convicts invite trouble.
But even as state inmate levels doubled in the last decade, legislatures kept a lid on prison industries despite encouragement from the federal government to expand them. Since 1979, the federal government has promoted a concept called "private sector/prison industries." The effort encourages private companies to set up factories and service the federal initiative, yet only 5,000 convicts nationwide have jobs under it. "It's an idea that nearly everyone on the left and right thinks is good," says prison consultant Barbara Auerbach. "And then things happen." What happens, explains Wisconsin State Senator Barbara Lorman, is that reform efforts bring out 'lots of enemies in the business community.' In 1988, Lorman helped Charles Yost, gung-ho chairman of the Wisconsin prison system's Badger State Industries (BSI), get lawmakers to allow private firms to run in-prison factories, but not before Wayne Corey, lobbyist for the state's furniture and janitorial-supply industries, won a concession: BSI had to stop selling convict-made metal desks and laundry services to local governments and nonprofit groups. The result: Zero increase in prison jobs for an inmate population that has grown by 13 percent in three years.
Labor leaders also squelch prison industries out of fear that convicts will take jobs away from law-abiding unionists. When California Governor George Deukmejian Federation Executive Secretary John Henning called the idea "slave labor." Henning succeeded in making opposition to Deukmejian's plan a litmus-test issue for Democrats, who received $173,550 in contributions from the labor group last year. The governor was forced to take an initiative drive straight to Golden State voters, who will decide the issue next month.
Medical licensing. State legislatures are supposed to keep an eye on medical boards, which in turn are supposed to yank the licenses of incompetent doctors. But during the 1980s, scandal after gruesome scandal befell these physician-dominated organizations. After a jury last year convicted a California doctor of misusing labor-inducing drugs and killing eight newborns, the judge who heard the case called it "a testament to the abject failure" of the state's medical board. Incidents like this led legislators in California and two-dozen other states to toughen the regulation of medical boards. Medical discipline has improved. But the 50 state medical boards punished only 2,600 physicians in 1987, the last year for which data that more than 200,000 cases of medical negligence occur every year.
Even on minor matters, swift, decisive action is not a defining quality of state legislators. The Maryland Legislature, for instance, took 11 years to decide the less-than-vexing question of whether optometrists should administer diagnostic eye drops during ocular exams. Ophthalmologists, fearing encroachment on their turf, argued that the optometrists weren't qualified - even though 49 other states grant optometrists the right. State Senator John Bambacus calls the "eye-drops bill," which became law last year, a "cash cow," suggesting that the interminable length of debate was due to legislators' eagerness to maintain the flow of campaign funds, restaurant meals and theater tickets provided by lobbyists on both sides of the issue. Maryland Delegate Royd Smith denies that contributions slowed the process, but cheerfully confesses that "my social life was not the same after I voted for that bill. '
Economic development. During the 1980s, states like Michigan and Iowa won praise for reinvigorate their economies. Most state economic-development efforts, however, involved granting favors to major in-state corporations, damaging the national economy in the process.
Typical is the recent rash of antitakeover laws corporations marshaled through legislatures in Indiana, Massachusetts, Ohio, New York, Wyoming and other states. Free-market conservatives denounce these laws as unwarranted government intrusions allowing corporate executives to escape the consequences of their own mismanagement. Thus, when Pennsylvania in April passed the toughest antitakeover law in the nation, Forbes magazine dubbed it "Socialism, Pennsylvania Style," failing to mention that the law's sponsor, Pennsylvania State Senator Noah Wenger, is a conservative Republican. Ideology counts for little when state legislators are struggling to keep jobs at home.
Antitakeover laws proliferate in part because corporations can threaten to move operations to states more to their liking. This same tactic helps companies win special tax breaks, which drain money for schools, roads and other projects states need to attract industry. Some 38 states now offer such tax are beginning to fight back. Ballot initiatives are on the upswing in the 26 states that allow citizens to go over legislators' heads. Some 40 initiatives and referenda were filed in 1984, 75 in 1990, a sign, says John Keast of the conservative Free Congress Research Foundation in Washington, D.C., of a "growing frustration among issue-oriented people." The most telling initiative passed last month, when Oklahomans slapped a 12-year limit on state legislators' terms. Similar measures in Colorado and California are likely to pass this fall.
States are also under public pressure to reform their campaign-finance systems. Twenty-eight states do not even limit PAC contributions to legislators. Disclosure requirements tend to be lax, and understaffed, poorly organized monitoring agencies are running jokes among statehouse reporters. Loose as campaign-finance laws are, politicians have somehow managed to run afoul of them. Ironically, the loudest complaints are coming from lobbyists, who say the ever-increasing costs of fund-raisers are straining their budgets. In March, the New Jersey The call came only after a lobbyist charged five top Assembly members with threatening to block her group's favored legislation unless she contributed $20,000 to their campaigns.
The declining performance of state lawmakers is something neither party likes to dwell on. It undermines Republican faith in the innate superiority of states over Washington and embarrasses Democrats, who control most statehouses. But unless they do something to improve the system, state legislators may one day - perhaps as early as next month - suffer rough justice at the polls. DISHONOR ROLL:
Corruption has grown in state capitals this term:
GUILTY: Eleven legislators convicted for bribery, including three each in South Carolina and West Virginia and two in California.
CHARGED: Seven others indicted in South Carolina. THE INSIDER:
Pennsylvania Senator Noah Wenger is a 14-year Statehouse veteran who describes himself as "a moderately conservative Republican." But when the Belzberg family this year made a raid on Armstrong World Industries, many of whose officers and employes live in Wenger, sponsoring a law forcing raiders to "disgorge" short-term profits and letting boards put community interests above those of shareholders.
Critics say the law merely protects incompetent managers. Institutional investors have threatened to divest themselves of the Pennsylvania-based company's stock. But if there is a price to pay for sponsoring the law, Wenger hasn't felt it. He's unopposed for re-election this fall. THE REFORMER:
Senator Barbara Lorman doesn't mind pushing for the highway bypasses that voters in her rural Wisconsin district care so much about. She has a passion, however, for helping a group who can't vote: Prisoners. Within her district are three prisons with nearly a third of the state's inmates. Lorman champions a program that teaches skills through prison-based jobs.
A Republican who ran her late husband's scrap-iron business, Lorman is no bleeding heart. She notes that the program actually saves taxpayer dollars. But voters don't care about the issue. And key business leaders and their lobbyists about the statehouse political system: "The general public has given up its power to the lobbyists."
Drawing: No caption, ILLUSTRATION BY EVERETT PECK FOR USN &WR;
Picture: No caption, BRUCE STRONG FOR USN &WR,; Picture: No caption, JOHN BIEVER FOR USN &WR;
By Paul Glastris and Andrew Bates
Being on time, within budget, and to specification can be difficult. As one project manager explained, "You can have it fast, cheap, or good. Pick two." EACH YEAR, an estimated 10 trillion dollars is spent on projects around the world, many of which fail. In fact, there hardly is a company that is satisfied with its project performance. By some measures, two-thirds or more new product, technology, and merger projects fail to meet expectations. Why, given the high rate of failure, do companies keep trying? Surely, there must be an easier way to earn a living. People have been taking on projects for thousands of years. Long before project management software. Earned Value Analysis, and Gantt charts, Egyptians were building pyramids, Romans aqueducts, and Americans and Canadians transcontinental railroads. We keep starting projects for the simple reason that things have to get done. Needs must be met. Greater value always is sought. Behind every project stands a core objective- "why" it should be project meets that objective and produces the intended value. It is critical to understand that whatever projects an organization decides to undertake reflect prior decisions as to the best way to meet a need. For example, launching a new product is just one way to increase market share; merging two companies is one method of advancing company strategy; redesigning a process is one of many ways to reduce costs or raise quality. In most cases, there are a number of alternative projects that will meet a company's objectives, and the one that management decides to undertake simply is the one that appears to be the best choice at the time. In the world of projects, success begins with picking the right ones. Consider the U.S. invasion of Iraq. A plan to overthrow Saddam Hussein carefully was thought out and executed. His regime fell; the U.S. captured Baghdad and American troops now are trying to maintain the peace. If its goal simply had been to oust a dictator, the project would have been a to achieve greater stability in the region and make the world safer from terrorist attacks, the project, thus far. has been unsuccessful-although it is far from over. Moreover, if this was the goal, it raises two important questions. Was the implemented project plan really the best alternative for creating the desired result? Should the project plan have been modified as it came up against reality? History will be the final judge. For now, it is left to leaders, generals, pundits, and the public to debate. Likewise, if an organization undertakes a project to install an enterprise customer relationship management system, the success of that project will not be defined as "installing X number of workstations, networked with Y number of servers, running Z number of configured software modules at some predetermined level of performance." Success will be defined first by whether that project was the right choice to meet the organization's business objectives, and second by the quality of the countless decisions that need to be it, whom to assign work to, how risk should be managed, and how to respond to the challenges that arise during implementation. Choosing the right projects on which to work requires understanding the organization's needs. Every project should, in some way, address one or more of three strategic needs by adding market share, size, or margin. That's it Any project, whether it is acquiring a company, launching a product, reducing cost, increasing customer satisfaction, raising employee retention, upping shareholder value, or even landscaping corporate headquarters, can, and should, be tied to one of these three core areas. Placed within that perspective, it is much easier to see and evaluate the range of available options. Are growing market share, size, and margin equally important to your organization? They may be, but not likely. Every company has a strategy that is best for them, and that strategy often changes over time. For companies such as eBay, the priority, online auctions. Raising margins or raising the share of a market that was unknown only a few years ago does not make much sense. Likewise, JetBlue's growth strategy comes from achieving market share through low prices and a differentiated customer experience. JetBlue also knows that it can grow the market for nonbusiness travel if it can lower the cost enough to tempt people who would not otherwise travel for pleasure to do so. So, any project at JetBlue should, in some way, even if it is just tangentially, support the goal of raising margins so that prices can be lowered and making travel on JetBlue much more than a ride in an airborne cattle car. Some will argue that aircraft maintenance or flight-attendant safety training projects do not support this strategy. They are undertaken as regulatory necessity. While that is true, penalties and government actions add costs that impact ticket prices. More importantly, a differentiated customer experience will not be very successful as a strategy if that difference also includes the fear of not the first job of the project manager-to be aware of how any given project supports the organization's strategic goals. Without this knowledge, it is almost impossible to make the correct decisions on project priority, investment, or design. A lack of attention to this relationship is at the root of many project failures. All too often, an organization will assess a project in midstream or, worse, at completion, remarking that it is on time, on budget, and flawlessly executed. Then, too late, they will realize that it does not really meet a need-or, if it does, it is apparent that there were other, simpler and less expensive ways to meet that need. It is not enough for the project manager to be aware of the strategic connection. Every member of the team has to understand the "why" behind the project-the desired business results suggested directly or indirectly by the strategy. They must know the answer to the question: At the end of the project, what an NT server "is not a proper answer." Five percent improved customer retention via reduced call center wait time "is the type of target they need to be aiming for. To the degree that the team appreciates the endgame and knows exactly what "on strategy" means, they will be able to bring the right information to the right decisions when defining and planning the project. They also will be better able to protect the project's goal when faced with the cold reality of implementation. Even when they are aligned perfectly with the organization's strategic goals, many projects fail because there is an assumption that they somehow will be implemented, as if by magic. Like a shopper on a buying spree forgetting how the credit card bills will be paidor even how all the stuff will fit in the carthe organization's leaders often fail to plan resource deployment so projects do not bump into each other or have teams squabble over common resources. The key to effective resource allocation is the prioritization of projects strategic value. That means not just evaluating each project's expected net present value and return on investment, but comparing its impact on the strategy. What is it worth to the company if it makes this much progress against the strategy? Where is the strategy telling us to look for value in terms of desired market share, market size, and margin? What is it saying about how best to achieve increases in these areas? Then, using this common measuring stick, how does the value of this project compare with that of other proposed projects? The output is a rank order of projects according to their value. A comparison of the benefits of all proposed projects is the first step in the prioritization process; the second is an evaluation of each project in terms of risk. What are the specific associated threats and how likely are they? Even more important, what can be done to reduce the probability of these threats? What can we do now to lessen the impact of the threats if on balance, should be compared to its risk. Does this project produce enough benefit to accept this risk? Decisionmakers will answer yes or no depending on the degree to which they are risk tolerant or risk averse. Their assessment also may vary with time. Viewed within the context of the collective risk of other projects in the portfolio, they may decide that, while it is important, a particular project should be delayed until a less risky time. Projects quickly can outstrip available cash flow. Bottlenecks can bring all projects to a grinding halt, as teams battle over a critical resource. To avoid these common threats, each of the proposed projects needs to be fully defined, using a standardized approach, before final decisions are made. The proposed scope and cost of the work must be delineated, so it can be compared to available resources. Simple modeling quickly will illustrate how far down the project list an organization can go before the work stops or slows. At that point, it is a, while putting lowerpriority projects on hold until additional resources can be found. If projects really are a collection of decisions about which needs must be met and how best to meet them, then an organization's projects will move at a glacial pace if decisionmaking is not pushed down to the lowest levels. Once a project gets underway, countless decisions must be made. What will be the steps in the project? Who will be responsible for each? How will they report on their progress? How will they avoid problems during implementation? What will they do if problems do occur? How will the organization leverage learning that results from the project". These and countless other choices are critical for success, but that does not mean they all should all be made by the "important" people. Not only would that be too slow but, in many cases, these important people have neither the information nor the technical skills to make these choices. Any decision requires two things to be successful implement it fully. Often, those higher up in the organization can not provide either. Pressure cooker If a project is particularly critical or competitive pressure is high, it probably will be necessary to harness the organization's best thinking when making decisions relating to the project plan. To the degree that you need the most creative, most technically talented people-or those who just have the facts-you have to involve them in these tactical decisions. Knowing what to do and doing it are two very different things. Given all the pressures and distractions to which people are subject at work, the project team needs to be committed fully. Commitment means doing whatever is necessary to see it through. Pushing aside competing priorities, enduring short-term hardships to gain long-term returns, and perhaps sacrificing personal time are increasingly the currency of project commitment. Just as knowing and doing are different things, asking for and gaining commitment are not the same, either. By involving the entire team in the project-definition and -planning stage, managers significantly can appreciation for, and commitment to, the business goals of the project. The quality of a project is defined by how well it meets a customer's needs or objectives. That usually includes being on time, within budget, and to specification. However, these are indicators of project efficiency, not quality. Meeting these indicators is far less important than achieving the project's core objective. What's more, these three indicators never can be equally important to the customer; one or, at most, two of the three measures must take precedence. It may be that having the product meet specifications is so critical that the buyer does not care if it is delivered late or costs more than expected-or perhaps the timetable is so tight that, if the work is a little off spec, it is preferable to taking extra time to get it exactly right. As a project manager once put it, "You can have it fast, cheap, or good. Pick two." Perhaps the greatest and performance is that they are lagging indicators. You only become aware that you are underperfonning after you have fallen behind schedule, gone over budget, or seen quality slip. Surely, these measures deserve to be watched closely but, in our experience, it is much more valuable to look at available leading indicators of project quality. Perhaps the best indicators relate to how well the members of the project team are working together. Do they have the right knowledge and skill to make sound choices, go after issues as soon as they surface and stay on them until they are resolved, have a sound process for resolving issues, and confront conflict directly? Are their choices consistent with the strategy and goals? Does each team member hold himself or herself accountable to meet commitments? Do they hold others accountable? Are those commitments and progress against them visible to all involved? Affirmative answers to these questions often are the single most accurate predictor of project success, regardless of the whether or not hidden threats materialize Nearly every project begins with optimism, or at least the belief that it is worth trying. Project team members may have their doubts but, if they agree to work on the project, they generally support it. Truly rare is the individual who deliberately works to sabotage the team's project. Everyone has the best intentions, but reality has a way of intruding. A project team's performance is only as good as the performance system within which the team operates. So, if the team is not performing as expected, begin the search for causes and corrective actions with an examination of the performance environment. The performance system is made up of all the factors within and around employees that influence their behavior. To assess how well your organization's performance system supports project teams and their members, managers should ask themselves a series of questions about their people and the environment in which they are expected to produce results. How well suited are the team members to the project? Do they have the necessary? Have they been given adequate time to understand and plan the work properly? Are they given adequate time and resources to do the work? Have distractions and interference been removed? On balance, do the benefits they receive for participating in the project outweigh the burden put on them? Are there appropriate, well-understood consequences for positive and negative behaviors? What feedback do team members get about their contribution? How timely is it? These and other questions related to the performance system will help identify factors that encourage the team behaviors needed for success-and those that discourage them. The circumstances surrounding project teams may never be perfect, but it is the responsibility of the manager and, ultimately, of top management, to ensure that the performance environment is as well managed as possible. Not all projects are created equal. Too many organizations fail to screen proposed projects against strategic criteria, set priorities, and plan the use of shared resources. The systematic evaluation of projects makes it easy to identify those that yield the those that meet the litmus test of strategic acceptability can be increased dramatically by paying attention to a few critical factors, such as engaging the brainpower of your most knowledgeable employees, regardless of job title: establishing-and gaining agreement on-clear goals and quality measures; gauging project success by leading, not lagging, indicators and, if necessary, making midcourse corrections: and aligning the performance system to support positive behavior by project teams and the individuals who comprise them. In today's complex, fiercely competitive environment, every job is a thinking job. This especially is true of project work. Project success hinges on carefully thinking through every aspect of the job-from core objectives to dayto-day implementation to ongoing measurement of progress and results. Sidebar "Nearly every project begins with optimism, or at least the belief that it is worth trying." Author Affiliation Andrew Graham is partner and chief operating officer of Kepner-Tregoe, Inc .. Philadelphia, Pa., an international business consulting fmn. Andrew Longman, partner and vice president of marketing at A Thinking Team's Guide to Getting Work Done. //
With our banks about to go the way of our S &Ls,; its time we made the Freedom of Information Act cover financial institutions too
Say your neighbor just cracked up his car. So he asks to borrow your limited-edition 1991 Acura NSX. But he hems and haws when you ask him how his accident happened and if he's had any others. Are you still going to let him borrow the Acura? Well, maybe. But you're pretty whacked if you don't first make him answer your questions. Some people will still think you're crazy for lending the car. But don't worry. You learn a lot faster than Congress.
Congress allowed our friendly neighborhood thrift regulators to hide under the cloak of official government secrecy -- lulling the press and public into complacency -- as hard-dollar damages grew from an estimated $50 billion in 1987 to nearly $200 billion today. Add another $300 billion or more for interest costs, additional anticipated thrift failures, and recessionary effects. Yet like a car owner who doesn't heed the warning of an attempts to assess another potential disaster-in-the-making -- the one brewing at the nation's banks. The bank regulators are citing the same confidentiality laws touted by the thrift regulators.
It wasn't just fraud, insider abuse, and an unreasonable government-regulated interest rate structure that created the S &L; crisis. There was another culprit: official government secrecy fostered by a major exemption in the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
Edwin Gray, who headed the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in the mid-1980s, says he was frustrated in trying to sound the alarm by his inability to release pertinent information to the press. The law says that doing so could have cost him his job as well as a year in prison. Gray now contends that the S &L; losses would never have grown so large had the public been given more information about the problem sooner. "That would have gone a long way to helping," he says.
House Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez puts it this way: "of official government secrecy."
The information blackout on financial institutions has been so severe that even law enforcement officials have had trouble getting the information they need to stop crooks. Jim Watson, one of the California attorney general's top narcotics officers, said that two years ago he couldn't even get the Federal Reserve to tell him whether banks in its Los Angeles region were sending a lot more cash back to the Reserve than they were taking and, hence, possibly laundering drug money. The Reserve now acknowledges that Los Angeles area banks do have large cash surpluses, but it still won't release cash totals for individual banks. Reserve spokesman Ron Supinski says the secrecy stems from "a business relationship. The banks don't want that released, and the Federal Reserve does not want it released, so it's not released."
The main culprit for this sanctimonious secrecy is Exemption 8 in FOIA, which says the American public needs to know about nearly all of its government institutions, by the courts, the exemption says government officials don't have to release information "contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of an agency responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions." This includes records kept by the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), which has replaced the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in regulating thrifts; the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates nationally-chartered banks; the Federal Reserve, which regulates key state-chartered banks; and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which regulates the state-chartered banks that don't belong to the Reserve.
Former thrift regulator Gray argues that because the United States insures all deposits, "that makes every taxpayer in America a shareholder in every federally insured institution, and if they are shareholders, then it seems to me we at least ought to disclose to taxpayers the same kind of information as shareholders get." But we don't. Few banks, taxpayers can't even learn if an institution is giving its executives excessive salaries or if its activities have drawn the special attention of regulators.
What information is released is not only difficult for lay people to interpret but also may be based on wildly misleading figures. The nation's banks and thrifts produce their own quarterly reports, which are in turn analyzed for the investment community by financial rating firms. But the firms' analyses rely on figures supplied by the financial institutions themselves. (And occasionally the ratings outfits reaped big bucks for their glowing reports at the very same time regulators were privately noting serious problems.)
The most accurate information often appears in the secret reports and memos generated by the government examiners. This is what the public needs to see: whether the examiners found accounting irregularities, whether property appraisals were missing and borrowers were not credit-worthy, whether borrowers were delinquent in repaying their loans, whether an institution's directors received low-interest loans, and whether an institution's managers withheld information Depression-era mindset obsessed with the idea that release of "sensitive" financial information would cause consumer panic and a run on banks. That thought is perpetuated today by industry lobbyists and regulators who talk about runs the same way the Pentagon used to bring up threats to national security every time anyone asked for information about a defense contract. But in fact, the establishment of government-backed insurance for every deposit of up to $100,000 has significantly reduced the risk of runs on banks and thrifts. And even depositors with more than the insured amount at risk are in effect covered: When the FDIC decided to bail out Continental Illinois Bank in 1984, it covered even enormous deposits because it said it couldn't let such a large bank go under, thereby setting a precedent that has since led the government to bail out all depositors everywhere, no matter the size of their accounts.
Even if the release of thrift examiners' reports had led to a few runs on S &Ls,; it's inconceivable that the result would've got now. Perhaps if a few more thrifts had gone up in smoke five years ago, there would have been fewer thrift failures today. Public pressure would have forced Congress to supply the money and the regulatory action needed to clean up the mess before it got out of control. The Keating jive
Instead, FOIA's Exemption 8 and related secrecy laws frustrated attempts by the (all-too-few) journalists, economic researchers, and others who suspected problems at thrifts and were trying to get a handle on the damage. What this official government secrecy bred is demonstrated by the autopsies of the few bank and thrift failures about which considerable information has become public -- usually through leaks, subpoenas issued in lawsuits, or congressional testimony. In each case, the after-the-fact release of crucial documents has shown that delays in regulatory action -- not likely to have occurred had the facts become public sooner -- have cost taxpayers billions.
When Charles Keating Jr. applied to buy Lincoln Savings and Loan in Irvine, California primary role, which was to help families buy homes. He wrote thrift regulators that "no changes are expected in the performance by Lincoln... in meeting the credit needs of its entire service area... including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods." Yet in the first year after he took over the thrift, he made only 11 home mortgages, at least four of them to officials of his parent company, American Continental Corp. So officials of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board knew early on that Keating was not keeping his most basic agreement with them, and by the spring of 1986, an agency examiner in San Francisco wrote a memo to his supervisors saying that Lincoln was a "disaster in the making." By mid 1987, the examiners' files clearly indicated that from Chairman Danny Wall on down, the Bank Board knew that Lincoln was essentially bankrupt and had, in effect, turned itself into a federally-insured casino. Yet Washington regulators, pressured by Keating's friends in the Senate, did not's final year, regulators sat and watched as 23,000 people walked into Charlie Keating's trap and unwittingly threw away $220 million of their life savings. If the public had access to the government examiners' files, Senators Alan Cranston, Dennis DeConcini, and Donald Riegle would have had a hard time claiming, as they actually did, that bureaucratic regulators were harassing Keating. Joseph Cotchett, the lawyer representing the 23,000 buyers of Lincoln's now-worthless junk bonds, says most of his clients would probably still have their money had the examiners' reports been public. The taxpayers' bailout of Lincoln is now expected to cost $2.5 billion.
James Moroney says that when he was a staff analyst for the Bank Board's Topeka district in 1986, he went to a fellow supervisor and asked why they were "putting up with" Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan. He was informed that one of the Denver-based thrift's directors was then-Vice President Bush's son. In the fall of 1987, the lawyer for Neil Bush was involved in questionable actions on the Silverado board. Then, wrote George Williamson in the San Francisco Chronicle, "For the next 15 months, federal regulators increasingly scrutinized, worried about, and most significantly -- put off critical action on the sensitive case .... Top thrift regulators engaged in a persistent pattern of delays involving Silverado, culminating with a series of unusual steps in the fall of 1988, when then-Vice President Bush was in the final stretch of his presidential campaign." Finally, on November 9, the day after the 1988 election, the president of the Topeka Federal Home Loan Bank signed a memo recommending a government takeover of Silverado, which occurred a month later. Had the regulators' files on Silverado been public in 1986 and 1987, it is highly unlikely that election-year politics would have delayed the thrift's seizure. Instead, Silverado cost taxpayers hundreds of thousands of dollars each of the hundreds of additional days it remained open, and its collapse is now expected to cost $1 billion of Texas was looting Vernon Savings and Loan to pay for hunting trips, a vacation house, prostitutes, and illegal campaign contributions. At that time, the thrift was only a quarter the size it was when finally seized by the government two years later. Sure, making this information public might have resulted in a run on Vernon. But what better time to have had an ugly little run? Taxpayers would have been spared paying most of the eventual $1.3 billion bailout cost. Instead, regulators continued to keep their files secret and did not begin to talk about a takeover until the end of 1986. Even then, former House Speaker Jim Wright, at the urging of then-Rep. Tony Coelho, sought to rescue the man who had let both of them sail his Vernon-financed yacht, High Spirits. Wright pleaded for a little more time for Dixon and got it. But in March 1987, the inevitable happened: the Bank Board took over Vernon. Wright probably wouldn't have demanded more time had were finally leaked to reporters, Wright's press secretary quickly issued a statement: "The Speaker's aim from the beginning has been to make sure that depositors are protected and that sound and salvageable private businesses are not forced into bankruptcy or foreclosure whenever that can be avoided." Sounds good in theory, but when regulators finally closed Vernon, they found that 96 percent of its loans were bad.
One doesn't need to look just at big cases to find examples of questionable enforcement that certainly would have bothered depositors and taxpayers had they known about them. When the California state archivist last fall inadvertently allowed San Jose Mercury News reporter Gary Webb to pore through boxes of confidential documents from the early 1980s, he found many unsettling practices at thrifts that stayed open far too long. In 1983 at Gateway Savings in Oakland, for example, a state Department of Savings and Loan examiner found "unsafe and unsound lending practices," including a $150,000 loan to a borrower with no job or other income which no property appraisals had been done. The thrift also made 53 loans totaling $2.1 million to its board members, some of whom were seriously delinquent in repaying them. But Gateway was not seized until 1986, when it was $65 million in debt. At First Security Savings in Eureka, 1983 was also the year that examiners found that two of the thrift's three directors were receiving $70,000 salaries while devoting zero time to the business. The thrift's president was paid a $170,000 salary plus a $439,000 bonus in a year in which his thrift made only a $15,000 profit. Yet regulators did not seize the thrift until 1988.
"If reporters like myself had gotten key documents, this S &L; crisis would have been severely shortened," maintains a northern California reporter, Steven Pizzo, who, together with Mary Fricker and Paul Muolo, published a book about the thrift industry's collapse, Inside Job, last fall. Pizzo says it took him four years to develop sources who would risk prison to depend on court cases and hope attorneys would attach exhibits. We had to look at bankruptcy cases, and we prayed for divorces because they were very revealing .... But we shouldn't have to work on a story like a Ouija board. "Donald Trump card
Despite the obstacles, some reporters have managed to demonstrate that government documents are often the key to uncovering corruption at banks and thrifts. Jerry Kammer and Andy Hall of the Arizona Republic, using their state's revealing records on real estate transactions, found that while DeConcini defended Keating from what the senator called "rogue bureaucratic regulators," two of DeConcini's top campaign aides amassed more than $50 million in real estate loans from Lincoln Savings. By examining an exhibit attached to a lawsuit, The Houston Post's Peter Brewton found out that $7 million of the $20 million a Texas S &L; had loaned out for a development project went to a company that was laundering drug money. Because her newspaper went to court, The Washington Post's councilwoman Charlene Drew Jarvis and her political adviser and social companion, Woodrow Boggs Jr., successfully pressed the agency to sell an ailing thrift to Citicorp, without disclosing that lobbyists for the New York banking giant had paid Boggs $60,150. But reporters more often than not are still turned down in their requests for information. Even now, when they get information leaked to them they never know whether they're looking at the elephant's leg or the whole elephant. Congressional researchers and public interest groups have the same difficulties.
Assigned to sell off and liquidate thrifts, the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) has acknowledged that it has allowed some of the thrifts' former executives to continue to draw six-figure salaries from the government, even though they are no longer working full time for the institutions and may be responsible for their demise. But the RTC has refused to release details on these salary arrangements, prompting Ralph Nader's Public Citizen interest group and Cox Newspapers to file a freedom of information lawsuit against the agency pry loose any information.
It took nearly three months of cage-rattling for a House Banking Committee staff member to obtain the OTS documents he needed to assess 94 deals the government made with buyers of failed thrifts in 1988. No wonder. The staff member's findings, released to the committee in September, revealed that regulators required the fat cat thrift buyers to invest a mere $2.2 billion in exchange for the government's contribution of $175 billion.
At the same time, other banking committee staff members were having trouble investigating banks' commercial lending practices, such as whether banks were channeling credit to large borrowers and ignoring smaller ones. The staff members wanted to use Donald Trump's loan restructuring as a case study. But Comptroller of the Currency Robert Clarke refused to release the essential information, claiming federal laws other than the FOIA, those governing disclosure of trade secrets and banking information, prohibited him from doing that. (Instead, the committee got the information detailing Trump's $3.2 billion debt, much commission. The commission was involved because Trump had pledged casino equity for the restructuring.) Committee Chairman Gonzalez later wrote Clarke that his agency and the Federal Reserve Board had "flatly stonewalled" the committee's efforts.
Indeed, the FDIC once even sued the comptroller's office for information and still didn't get everything it wanted. Courts have also declined to require regulators to release information on competing bids to take over a failed thrift and have refused to help the Consumers Union get information on banks that are miscalculating interest rates. Former regulator James Barth said that when he was with the Bank Board, people would sometimes ask for information about an S &L; that, unbeknownst to them, was in the thrift's own annual report and on file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, but the Bank Board still wouldn't give it out.
National archivists, in fact, will release bank examination reports from the Comptroller of the Currency only if an institution has been defunct for 50 years. report, regardless of how old it is, if the bank is still operating. "We don't allow that, period," says Frank Vance, the comptroller's disclosure officer. "As long as banks are up and running, examination reports are off limits." Too close for discomfort
This cult of secrecy envelops state regulators as well. Raymond Vickers, a former top bank and thrift regulator for Florida, said he had to fight for a year-and-a-half before he got 60-year-old examination reports from Florida Controller-Banking Commissioner Gerald Lewis last year. Vickers wanted them to study Florida bank failures in the 1920s for his doctoral dissertation. He found that every bank that failed was rampant with fraud or insider abuse. And guess what? The regulators knew what was going on.
"This is an institutional obsession. They financial regulators are so obsessed with confidentiality, it's just a knee-jerk reaction," says Mike Malloy, a law professor and graduate studies director at Fordham Law School. "The earth," exclaims Kammer of the Arizona Republic.
A look at California -- which in 1968 adopted a public records disclosure law with an exemption for financial documents virtually identical to Exemption 8 of FOIA -- illuminates why the FOIA exemption has persisted despite the S &L; debacle. Michael Dorais, general counsel for the California Newspaper Publishers Association, recalls that the public records law would not have passed had its proponents not bowed to the financial industry's lobbyists. "They had relationships that wouldn't quit," says Dorais. "Nobody had more muscle than these guys, except alcohol and horse racing interests." Twenty-two years and one S &L; scandal later, nothing has changed. State Assemblyman Richard Floyd recently introduced legislation to repeal the exemption for bank and thrift documents, but he couldn't even get it out of committee. "Once they realized that this was going to a hearing, the bankers went into a red-alert mode," says Floyd. A state banking department lawyer argued that even though to anyone outside the financial regulatory community, "it would still result in" serious harm to the financial institutions involved, in many cases potentially causing, in effect, a run on a bank .... Presently, this department and the industry we regulate maintain cordial relations in our examination and regulatory activities, due, in large measure, to the knowledge... that the information made available to us is not available to the public. This bill would have a very chilling effect on that relationship. "Sure, public inspection could ruin the genial relationship that exists between the financial industry and its watchdogs. That's sort of the point. Your government inaction
Post-S &L; crisis efforts to modify the FOIA exemption haven't fared any better. Rep. Joe Kennedy, with assistance from Rep. Gonzalez, managed to get a provision in last year's S &L; bailout bill that requires regulators to release information on racial disparities in loan rejections at individual S &Ls.; (The measure was prompted by a Pulitzer Prize-winning story in The as often as whites when they applied for home loans. The newspaper had been shut out when it tried to get figures for individual thrifts.) But that has been the only change in the confidentiality laws. The House Governmental Operations Committee recently held a heating on various proposals to modify Exemption 8. Ralph Nader and an ACLU lobbyist testified, but no votes were taken. Sherry Ettleson of CongressWatch says she couldn't even get anyone on the House Banking Committee to conduct a hearing on Exemption 8. One congressional subcommittee held a separate heating on legislation proposed by Rep. Gerald Kleczka that would have made a number of changes in the FOIA, including a narrowing of the exemption for financial records. But it wasn't voted on either.
This lack of action is deplorable, particularly when there is such confusion and disagreement as to the condition of the nation's banks.
Dan Brumbaugh and James Barth, two economists and former thrift regulators who predicted the S &L; crisis in 1985, have been assigned banks for a House banking subcommittee. They fear the institutions could be in far worse shape than FDIC Chairman William Seidman has acknowledged and warn that another taxpayer bailout may be needed. But the three researchers have been denied access to many of the documents they requested for their study. At one point, Rep. Frank Annunzio, the subcommittee chairman, himself asked for a list of the nation's problem banks, promising that it would be kept for the subcommittee's use only. But Seidman refused to release the list to Annunzio, calling it one of the FDIC's "most sensitive documents .... I am sure you can appreciate the possible consequences for individual institutions and the banking system should information from the list be disclosed, even if advertently," Seidman wrote. Never mind the consequences for taxpayers and consumers if it is not disclosed.
Brumbaugh says he is "convinced that the reason why they are not giving us the data we need is that they realize an objective analysis of the banks is going. Much worse. I think it's a scandal and an outrage. They're covering up." He says that "it was like pulling teeth" just to get the nonconfidential data. Government Accounting Office Comptroller General Charles Bowsher also suspects a disaster waiting to happen. "Not since its birth during the Great Depression has the federal system of deposit insurance for commercial banks faced such a period of danger and uncertainty as it does today," he says. If he's right, why should we have to find out the hard way? Freeing up FOIA
Of course, just because the information is there, it doesn't follow that the press is going to do its job and report it to Joe Taxpayer. And it doesn't mean that Congress will do the right thing either. Congress knew quite a bit in 1987 when it passed a flimsy bailout bill that grossly underestimated the S &L; problem and sided with the people who were causing it. When Michael Binstein was leaked more than the spectacular findings in the Washington D.C. business and politics magazine Regardie's in 1987, not one other reporter asked to see the documents. And this year, Steven Pizzo had to go to Penthouse to publish a story that he wrote on how CIA freelance operatives took full advantage of the thrift situation, using federally insured bank and thrift money to fund politically unpopular covert activities. (Peter Brewton published stories on the same topic in The Houston Post.)
But it would be a lot harder for Congress or the press to sleep on the job if the facts were staring them in the face, or at least were a few blocks away in a room full of public documents. Other publications might have run a story similar to Binstein's if one of their own reporters could get access to the same documents -- if it were just a matter of following up on what he or Brewton had already dug up in the public record. Keating's top lieutenant, Judy Wisher, once said in court very damaging, that it curtailed the thrift's brokered deposit program and caused lenders to refuse to renew some of its holding company's credit lines. And that was a story published locally on the other side of the country. Imagine what would have happened if Binstein's piece had run on the front page of the Los Angeles Times. The chances are pretty good that Keating would not have subsequently been able to dupe 23,000 southern Californians out of their life savings while Bank Board Chairman Danny Wall and other Washington regulators were offering pat reassurances.
Which points to a truism about government: While some regulators like Wall will always take the easy way out and soften their criticism out of fear that they will upset a powerful figure, in general regulators do a better job if they know their work will become public. And that fact makes it a lot harder for their bosses to suppress their good efforts. The upshot is that taxpayers find out a lot more about their government disclosure is how safety problems the FBI was caught conducting illegal surveillance of hundreds of American citizens and groups opposed to the administration's policies in Central America, and how we finally learned that former high-level government officials successfully used their political influence at HUD to rake in large fees from developers.
Recent improvements at private medical labs clearly illustrate the kind of cleanup that disclosure can prompt in an industry where the public release of regulators' documents, SEC filings, nonprofit agency tax forms, or other records allow the public to make sure regulators are protecting consumers. The Wall Street Journal's Walt Bogdanich used an array of documents from federal and state health regulators and court records to prove in 1987 that inaccurate and unreliable testing of body fluids and tissues at clinical labs was a serious health hazard as well as a waste of millions of dollars.
Disclosure could be likewise beneficial at banks and thrifts. Small depositors are protected by deposit insurance in the event of a bank or thrift failure, but more information could help them avoid going through checks returned unpaid, or the interest rates promised to them by one institution voided by another. Big depositors and lenders have other reasons for wanting to know more about the financial institutions they're considering doing business with. A builder, for example, who has taken out a partial loan for a development wants to know if his bank is going to be around to issue the money promised for the rest of the project. And some individuals and corporations don't want to invest in a crooked institution simply because they figure that if it cheats the government, it's likely to cheat customers too.
When you get down to it, the only thing non-disclosure really does is protect the unscrupulous operators. Saying you can't let the truth out about a bank or thrift because it could lead to a run on the institution and a lack of consumer confidence in the banking industry is as crazy as saying Transportation officials shouldn't have released information about the deadly defect in the 1973 Ford Pinto's fuel tank.
Members of Congress who have criticized the secrecy of bank and thrift regulation should now do something about it. Congress wrote the confidentiality laws, and it can rewrite them. We shouldn't just wait for the courts to change them, even though some judges may want to. When Consumers Union sought to obtain information on banks' compliance with truth-in-lending laws 12 years ago, U.S. Court of Appeals Judge J. Skelly Wright wrote: "First, a central proposition underlying Exemption 8 -- that certain information must be kept from the public for fear that it will be misunderstood and lead to overreaction -- is somewhat inconsistent with the philosophy behind the Freedom of Information Act. Second, the mere fact that there is a long-standing tradition of confidentiality of bank records -- a tradition occasionally referred to with some reverence in testimony before the Senate subcommittee -- strikes me as irrelevant. It may be time for a reexamination."
What better time than now? The public has more than paid the price of admission to
Teresa Simons is a Washington, D.C. freelance writer.
She met him in a laundromat in London. He was open and friendly and they hit it off right away. From the start she thought he was hilarious. Of course, she'd been lonely. The weather was grim and sleety and she didn't know a soul east of the Atlantic. "Ah, traveler's loneliness," Dan crooned sympathetically over dinner. "It's the worst." After dessert he was embarrassed to discover he'd come without his wallet. She was more than happy to pay for dinner. At the pub, over drinks, he told her he was a translator for the United Nations. He was, for now, between assignments. They saw each other four times that week, five the week after. It wasn't long before he had all but moved in with Elsa. It was against her nature, but she was having the time of her life. Still, there were details, unexplained, undiscussed, that she shoved out of her mind. He never invited her to his home brought over a carton filled with tape recorders -- plastic-wrapped straight from the factory, unopened; a few days later they were gone. Once she came home to find three televisions stacked in the corner. "Storing them for a friend," was all he told her. When she pressed for more he merely shrugged. Once he stayed away for three days and was lying asleep on the bed when she came in midmorning. "Where have you been?" she cried. "I've been so worried. Where were you?" He looked sour as he woke up. "Don't ever ask me that," he snapped. "I won't have it." "What --?" "Where I go, what I do, who I do it with -- it doesn't concern you, Elsa. Don't ask." He was like a different person. But then he seemed to pull himself together, shook the sleep off, and reached out to her said in his old gentle way, "but think of jealousy as a flu, and wait to get over it. And you will, baby, you will." Like a mother cat licking her kitten, he groomed her back into trusting him. One night she asked him lightly if he felt like stepping out to the corner and bringing her an ice cream. He didn't reply, and when she glanced up she found him glaring at her furiously. "Always got everything you wanted, didn't you?" he asked in a strange, snide way. "Any little thing little Elsa wanted, somebody always jumped up and ran out and bought it far her, didn't they?" "Are you kidding? I'm not like that. What are you talking about?" He got up from the chair and walked out. She never saw him again. There is a class of individuals who have been around forever and who are found in every race, culture met these people, been deceived and manipulated by them, and forced to live with or repair the damage they have wrought. These often charming -- but always deadly -- individuals have a clinical name: psychopaths. Their hallmark is a stunning lack of conscience; their game is self-gratification at the other person's expense. Many spend time in prison, but many do not. All take far more than they give. The most obvious expressions of psychopathy -- but not the only ones -- involve the flagrant violation of society's rules. Not surprisingly, many psychopaths are criminals, but many others manage to remain out of prison, using their charm and chameleonlike coloration to cut a wide swathe through society and leaving a wake of ruined lives behind them. A major part of my own quarter-century search for answers to this enigma has been a concerted effort to develop an accurate means of detecting the psychopaths among us. Measurement and categorization are of course fundamental to any scientific endeavor, but the implications of being able To put it simply, if we can't spot them we are doomed to be their victims, both as individuals and as a society. My role in the search for psychopaths began in the 1960s at the psychology department of the University of British Columbia. There, my growing interest in psychopathy merged with my experience working with psychopaths in prison to form what was my life work. I assembled a team of clinicians who would identify psychopaths in the prison population by means of long, detailed interviews and close study of file information. From this eventually developed a highly reliable diagnostic tool that any clinician or researcher could use and that yielded a richly detailed profile of the personality disorder called psychopathy. We named this instrument the Psychopathy Check list (Multi-Health Systems; 1991). The checklist is now used world-wide and provides clinicians and researchers with a way of distinguishing with reasonable certainty true psychopaths from those who merely break the rules. What follows is a general summary of the key traits and behaviors of a psychopath others. A diagnosis requires explicit training and access to the formal scoring manual. If you suspect that someone you know conforms to the profile described here, and if it is important for you to have an expert opinion, you should obtain the services of a qualified (registered) forensic psychologist or psychiatrist. Also, be aware that people who are not psychopaths may have some of the symptoms described here. Many people are impulsive, or glib, or cold and unfeeling, but this does not mean that they are psychopaths. Psychopathy is a syndrome -- a cluster of related symptoms. KEY SYMPTOMS OF PSYCHOPATHY EMOTIONAL/INTERPERSONAL: * Glib and superficial * Egocentric and grandiose * Lack of remorse or guilt * Lack of empathy * Deceitful and manipulative * Shallow emotions SOCIAL DEVIANCE: * Impulsive * Poor behavior controls * Need for excitement * Lack of responsibility * Early behavior problems * Adult antisocial behavior GLIB AND SUPERFICIAL Psychopaths are often voluble and verbally facile. They can be amusing and entertaining conversationalists, ready with a clever stories that cast themselves in a good light. They can be very effective in presenting themselves well and are often very likable and charming. One of my raters described an interview she did with a prisoner: "I sat down and took out my clipboard," she said, "and the first thing this guy told me was what beautiful eyes I had. He managed to work quite a few compliments on my appearance into the interview, so by the time I wrapped things up, I was feeling unusually... well, pretty. I'm a wary person especially on the job, and can usually spot a phony. When I got back outside, I couldn't believe I'd fallen for a line like that." EGOCENTRIC AND GRANDIOSE Psychopaths have a narcissistic and grossly inflated view of their own self-worth and importance, a truly astounding egocentricity and sense of entitlement, and see themselves as the center of the universe, justified in living according to their own rules. "It's not that subject. I follow my own laws. I never violate my own rules." She then proceeded to describe these rules in terms of "looking out for number one." Psychopaths often claim to have specific goals but show little appreciation regarding the qualifications required -- they have no idea of how to achieve them and little or no chance of attaining these goals, given their track record and lack of sustained interest in formal education. The psychopathic inmate might outline vague plans to become a lawyer for the poor or a property tycoon. One inmate, not particularly literate, managed to copyright the title of a book he was planning to write about himself, already counting the fortune his best-selling book would bring. LACK OF REMORSE OR GUILT Psychopaths show a stunning lack of concern for the effects their actions have on others, no matter how devastating these might be. They may appear completely forthright about the matter, calmly stating that they have no sense of guilt, are not sorry for the ensuing pain concerned. When asked if he had any regrets about stabbing a robbery victim who subsequently spent time in the hospital as a result of his wounds, one of our subjects replied, "Get real! He spends a few months in hospital and I rot here. If I wanted to kill him I would have slit his throat. That's the kind of guy I am; I gave him a break." Their lack of remorse or guilt is associated with a remarkable ability to rationalize their behavior, to shrug off personal responsibility for actions that cause family, friends, and others to reel with shock and disappointment. They usually have handy excuses for their behavior, and in some cases deny that it happened at all. LACK OF EMPATHY Many of the characteristics displayed by psychopaths are closely associated with a profound lack of empathy and inability to construct a mental and emotional "facsimile" of another person. They seem completely unable to "get into the skin" of others, except in a purely and suffering of family and strangers alike. If they do maintain ties, it is only because they see family members as possessions. One of our subjects allowed her boyfriend to sexually molest her five-year-old daughter because "he wore me out. I wasn't ready for more sex that night." The woman found it hard to understand why the authorities took her child into care. DECEITFUL AND MANIPULATIVE With their powers of imagination in gear and beamed on themselves, psychopaths appear amazingly unfazed by the possibility -- or even by the certainty -- of being found out. When caught in a lie or challenged with the is truth, they seldom appear perplexed or embarrassed -- they simply change their stories or attempt to rework the facts so they appear to be consistent with the lie. The result is a series of contradictory statements and a thoroughly confused listener. And psychopaths seem proud of their ability to lie. When asked if she lied easily, one woman laughed and replied, "I'm the best. I about myself. They think, well, if she's admitting to that she must be telling the truth about the rest." SHALLOW EMOTIONS Psychopaths seem to suffer a kind of emotional poverty that limits the range and depth of their feelings. At times they appear to be cold and unemotional while nevertheless being prone to dramatic, shallow, and short-lived displays of feeling. Careful observers are left with the impression they are play-acting and little is going on below the surface. A psychopath in our research said that he didn't really understand what others meant by fear. "When I rob a bank," he said, "I notice that the teller shakes. One barfed all over the money. She must have been pretty messed up inside, but I don't know why. If someone pointed a gun at me I guess I'd be afraid, but I wouldn't throw up." When asked if he ever felt his heart pound or his stomach churn, he replied, "Of get pumped up when I have sex or when I get into a fight." IMPULSIVE Psychopaths are unlikely to spend much time weighing the pros and cons of a course of action or considering the possible consequences. "I did it because I felt like it," is a common response. These impulsive acts often result from an aim that plays a central role in most of the psychopath's behavior: to achieve immediate satisfaction, pleasure, or relief. So family members, relatives, employers, and coworkers typically find themselves standing around asking themselves what happened -- jobs are quit, relationships broken off, plans changed, houses ransacked, people hurt, often for what appears as little more than a whim. As the husband of a psychopath I studied put it: "She got up and left the table, and that was the last I saw of her for two months." POOR BEHAVIOR CONTROLS Besides being impulsive, psychopaths are highly reactive to perceived insults or slights. Most of us have would like to respond aggressively we are usually able to "keep the lid on." In psychopaths, these inhibitory controls are weak, and the slightest provocation is sufficient to overcome them. As a result, psychopaths are short-tempered or hotheaded and tend to respond to frustration, failure, discipline, and criticism with sudden violence, threats or verbal abuse. But their outbursts, extreme as they may be, are often short-lived, and they quickly act as if nothing out of the ordinary has happened. For example, an inmate in line for dinner was accidentally bumped by another inmate, whom he proceeded to beat senseless. The attacker then stepped back into line as if nothing had happened. Despite the fact that he faced solitary confinement as punishment for the infraction, his only comment when asked to explain himself was, "I was pissed off. He stepped into my space. I did what I had to do." Although psychopaths have a "hair trigger," their aggressive displays are "other individuals lose their temper. A NEED FOR EXCITEMENT Psychopaths have an ongoing and excessive need for excitement -- they long to live in the fast lane or" on the edge, "where the action is. In many cases the action involves the breaking of rules. Many psychopaths describe "doing crime" for excitement or thrills. When asked if she ever did dangerous things just for fun, one of our female psychopaths replied, "Yeah, lots of things. But what I find most exciting is walking though airports with drugs. Christ! What a high!" The flip side of this yen for excitement is an inability to tolerate routine or monotony. Psychopaths are easily bored and are not likely to engage in activities that are dull, repetitive, or require intense concentration over long periods. LACK OF RESPONSIBILITY Obligations and commitments mean nothing to psychopaths. Their good intentions -- "I'll never cheat on you again" -- are promises written on the wind. Horrendous credit histories, for example off, the empty pledge to contribute to a child's support. Their performance on the job is erratic, with frequent absences, misuse of company resources, violations of company policy, and general untrustworthiness. They do not honor formal or implied commitments to people, organizations, or principles. Psychopaths are not deterred by the possibility that their actions mean hardship or risk for others. A 25-year-old inmate in our studies has received more than 20 convictions for dangerous driving, driving while impaired, leaving the scene of an accident, driving without a license, and criminal negligence causing death. When asked if he would continue to drive after his release from prison, he replied, "Why not? Sure, I drive fast, but I'm good at it. It takes two to have an accident." EARLY BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS Most psychopaths begin to exhibit serious behavioral problems at an early age. These might include persistent lying, cheating, theft, arson, truancy, substance abuse, vandalism, and/or precocious at one time or another -- especially children raised in violent neighborhoods or in disrupted or abusive families -- it is important to emphasize that the psychopath's history of such behaviors is more extensive and serious than most, even when compared with that of siblings and friends raised in similar settings. One subject, serving time for fraud, told us that as a child he would put a noose around the neck of a cat, tie the other end of the string to the top of a pole, and bat the cat around the pole with a tennis racket. Although not all adult psychopaths exhibited this degree of cruelty when in their youth, virtually all routinely got themselves into a wide range of difficulties. ADULT ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR Psychopaths see the rules and expectations of society as inconvenient and unreasonable impediments to their own behavioral expression. They make their own rules, both as children and as adults. Many of the antisocial acts of psychopaths lead to criminal charges and convictions. Even within the criminal population, psychopaths stand psychopaths are more varied and frequent than are those of other criminals. Psychopaths tend to have no particular affinity, or "specialty," for one particular type of crime but tend to try everything. But not all psychopaths end up in jail. Many of the things they do escape detection or prosecution, or are on "the shady side of the law." For them, antisocial behavior may consist of phony stock promotions, questionable business practices, spouse or child abuse, and so forth. Many others do things that, though not necessarily illegal, are nevertheless unethical, immoral, or harmful to others: philandering or cheating on a spouse to name a few. ORIGINS Thinking about psychopathy leads us very quickly to a single fundamental question: Why are some people like this? Unfortunately, the forces that produce a psychopath are still obscure, an admission those looking for clear answers will find unsatisfying. Nevertheless, there are several rudimentary theories about the cause of psychopathy worth considering. At one end the product of genetic or biological factors (nature), whereas theories at the other end posit that psychopathy results entirely from a faulty early social environment (nurture). The position that I favor is that psychopathy emerges from a complex -- and poorly understood -- interplay between biological factors and social forces. It is based on evidence that genetic factors contribute to the biological bases of brain function and to basic personality structure, which in turn influence the way an individual responds to, and interacts with, life experiences and the social environment. In effect, the core elements needed for the development of psychopathy -- including a profound inability to experience empathy and the complete range of emotions, including fear -- are in part provided by nature and possibly by some unknown biological influences on the developing fetus and neonate. As a result, the capacity for developing internal controls and conscience and for making emotional "connections" with others is greatly reduced. CAN ANYTHING BE DONE? In their desperate search for solutions people trapped in are told: Quit indulging him and send him for therapy. A basic assumption of psychotherapy is that the patient needs and wants help for distressing or painful psychological and emotional problems. Successful therapy also requires that the patient actively participate, along with the therapist, in the search for relief of his or her symptoms. In short, the patient must recognize there is a problem and must want to do something about it. But here is the crux: Psychopaths don't feel they have psychological or emotional problems, and they see no reason to change their behavior to conform with societal standards they do not agree with. Thus, in spite of more than a century of clinical study and decades of research, the mystery of the psychopathy still remains. Recent developments have provided us with new insights into the nature of this disturbing disorder, and its borders are becoming more defined. But compared with other major clinical disorders, little research has been devoted to psychopathy, even though it is responsible for more social So, rather than trying to pick up the pieces after the damage has been done, it would make far greater sense to increase our efforts to understand this perplexing disorder and to search for effective early interventions. The alternatives are to continue devoting massive resources to the prosecution, incarceration, and supervision of psychopaths after they have committed offenses against society, and to continue to ignore the welfare and plight of their victims. We have to learn how to socialize them, not resocialize them. And this will require serious efforts at research and early intervention. It is imperative that we continue the search for clues. A SURVIVAL GUIDE Although no one is completely immune to the devious machinations of the psychopath, there are some things you can do to reduce your vulnerability. * Know what you are dealing with. This sounds easy but in fact can be very difficult. All the reading in the world can not immunize you from the devastating effects of psychopaths. Everyone, including the experts, can be taken in good psychopath can play a concerto on anyone's heart strings. * Try not to be influenced by "props." It is not easy to get beyond the winning smile, the captivating body language, the fast talk of the typical psychopath, all of which blind us to his or her real intentions. Many people find it difficult to deal with the intense, "predatory stare" of the psychopath. The fixated stare is more a prelude to self-gratification and the exercise of power rather than simple interest or empathic caring. * Don't wear blinders. Enter new relationships with your eyes wide open. Like the rest of us, most psychopathic con-artists and "love-thieves" initially hide their dark side by putting their "best foot forward." Cracks may soon begin to appear in the mask they wear, but once trapped in their web, it will be difficult to escape financially and emotionally unscathed. * Keep your guard up in high-risk situations. Some situations are tailor-made for psychopaths: singles bars each case, the potential victim is lonely, looking for a good time, excitement, or companionship, and there will usually be someone willing to oblige, for a hidden price. * Know yourself. Psychopaths are skilled at detecting and ruthlessly exploiting your weak spots. Your best defense is to understand what these spots are, and to be extremely wary of anyone who zeroes in on them. Unfortunately, even the most careful precautions are no guarantee that you will be safe from a determined psychopath. In such cases, all you can do is try to exert some sort of damage control. This is not easy but some suggestions may be of help: * Obtain professional advice. Make sure the clinician you consult is familiar with the literature on psychopathy and has had experience in dealing with psychopaths. * Don't blame yourself. Whatever the reasons for being involved with a psychopath, it is important that you not accept blame for his or her attitudes and behavior. Psychopaths play by the same rules -- who the victim is. Psychopaths often give the impression that it is they who are suffering and that the victims are to blame for their misery. Don't waste your sympathy on them. * Recognize that you are not alone. Most psychopaths have lots of victims. It is certain that a psychopath who is causing you grief is also causing grief to others. * Be careful about power struggles. Keep in mind that psychopaths have a strong need for psychological and physical control over others. This doesn't mean that you shouldn't stand up for your rights, but it will probably be difficult to do so without risking serious emotional or physical trauma. * Set firm ground rules. Although power struggles with a psychopath are risky, you may be able to set up some clear rules -- both for yourself and for the psychopath -- to make your life easier and begin the difficult transition from victim to a person looking out for yourself. * Don't expect dramatic changes. To a large extent, "There is little likelihood that anything you do will produce fundamental, sustained changes in how they see themselves or others. * Cut your losses. Most victims of psychopaths end up feeling confused and hopeless, and convinced that they are largely to blame for the problem. The more you give in the more you will be taken advantage of by the psychopath's insatiable appetite for power and control. * Use support groups. By the time your suspicions have led you to seek a diagnosis, you already know that you're in for a very long and bumpy ride. Make sure you have all the emotional support you can muster.
Baby boomers: We were supposed to be the generation that turned aging into a bedroom act, making it sexy to grow old and gray, and get laugh lines. If 76 million of us wrinkled into middle age with style and verve, well, wow, the entire Western World might rethink the need to search for a fountain of youth. Most of us, however, don't seem to have found that sense of contentment with our aging bodies that we expected to. Instead, baby boomers have both masterminded-and fallen victim to-an anti-aging epidemic far more virulent than the average case of mass hysteria. It isn't simply that we're trying to exercise and eat our way to longer, healthier lives. Sales are up dramatically across the gamut of age-fighting weaponry, from wrinkle creams to collagen injections to cosmetic surgery. Nor are the warriors only women. According to a recent Roper Starch Worldwide survey, six percent of men nationwide actually use such traditionally feminine products as bronzers and foundation to create the illusion of a more youthful appearance. What is it we frightened of looking and feeling old because it reminds us that we're mortal? That we might become infirm? What, in fact, does older age bring and how will it be different for us boomers than for the generations that came before? The first surprise is that those of us entering the middle years en masse are truly lucky to be hitting our thirties, forties, and fifties now, in the 1990s. Because the state of a civilization has a very real impact on the inevitable path to getting older, every generation experiences aging differently According to aging expert Helen Kivnick, Ph.D., a psychologist at the University of Minnesota, the experience of later life is determined partly by biology partly by history, and partly by society and culture. Never before in history has the phase of later life had the potential to be so long and fruitful. "Old age as we now know it is very new, and doesn't look at all like it used to," Kivnick says. they can plan their futures more actively Elders today those over 65 are breaking new ground. "OLD AIN'T WHAT IT USED TO BE If those who are old today are stepping onto untrodden ground, we boomers are about to create a stampede. And chances are we'll be extremely skilled at making old age into an interesting and fruitful time of life. We know how to explore and plumb possibility. We have already been enjoying far fewer societal constraints in our middle years than has ever previously been the norm. Renee Garfinkel, Ph.D., a psychologist and aging expert from Silver Springs, Maryland, says across the board we have fewer age-based limitations to hinder us. "It's not simply that we tend to keep our health longer; it's that we also aren't subject to generational restrictions on behavior, career choices, or clothing." If you decide to go to medical school-or rollerblading-tomorrow, you might just do so. If I pick out similar dresses for my five-year-old daughter and me: She won't be dressed "old," and I won't be dressed "young." Our tastes are actually fairly alike. In blue jeans and sweaters-particularly from the back-one often can't tell a fit 55-year-old from his or her fit adolescent kid. As recently as twenty or thirty years ago, society was much more hierarchical. When a woman's children left home, she struggled to make sense of a future in which her life's task was done, even though she herself remained healthy and alert and capable of making further-and even greater-contributions. In the 1970s, when women in their thirties and forties ventured out to colleges and universities in large numbers, they were breaking norms and redefining their roles. Certainly, I myself would have been extremely aware of the oddity of an older man or woman-even a person so aged as to be in his or her late twenties-sitting in a lecture hall back when I was in college. Nowadays, that's almost laughable: The student in the next a grandparent as an 18-year-old. In fact, if those "non-traditional" students weren't filling seats, many institutions of higher learning would be struggling to keep their doors open. Middle age doesn't mean what it used to. Mid-lifers aren't ossified and set in their ways; they tend to be open to new ideas and new experiences; the tastes of childhood have matured but the sense of potential and of discovery is still deep and real. A former newspaper editor, who had her first child at the age of forty and recently completed her doctoral dissertation at the age of forty-five, says, "I know how old I am. I'm not in denial about the fact of the years. I simply reject the fears, stereotypes, and caricatures of aging. If you ask me my age, I'll tell you, but I don't think it's the most relevant fact about me." "I think young," says a globe-trotting artist in his early eighties. or act old, until they cart me out in a box. "Does attitude make a difference? Are we truly only as old as we feel? Yes and no, says Garfinkel, who heads Gerontology Service, a consulting practice for institutions that deal with the elderly She finds that we associate aging with dysfunction. A young person in poor health tends to report feeling old, while an old person in good health feels young and active. "It's a two-way street," says Garfinkel. "If you aren't in good health, it's very hard to think young. But if you think young, have good genes, and take care of yourself, you'll probably feel and seem younger than you are." Believing yourself to be in better than normal condition for your age is typical for healthy people in general. It's not that we're deluding ourselves, it's simply that the interplay of chronological age and physical health is much stronger than we tend to realize: According to "The Wrinkle Report," a national survey of more than 1,200 people ages 30 to 50, three in four baby boomers think they look younger than their actual years, and eight in ten say they have fewer signs of facial aging than other people their age. "People in their forties and those in their eighties actually say quite similar things," Garfinkel reports. "It's more an indication of physical health than of anything else. If we don't feel bad, we feel great. We're a little bit like the people in Lake Woebegon, whose children are all above average." AM I OLD YET? People tend not to feel downright old, no matter what their age. They just get more and more surprised when they look in the mirror and see the ways in which they're changing physically The fact is that aging tends to be subtle and most losses come hand in hand with small, new rewards. For example, one's first gray major promotion-somehow the equation of loss and gain nets out in a surprisingly satisfying manner. In some way, we continue to expect that the next milestone will be the one that makes us suddenly feel old. I'm reminded of a birthday luncheon I went to recently for a friend who's just rounded the hump of thirty. Call her Sally. Sally had anticipated the event with a great deal of fear and anxiety, and was surprised at how little change the actual big day had wrought. I mentioned that I'd felt very few negative changes during my thirties, and said that I felt surer of myself and much happier than I'd been in my twenties. Then Kim, our 43-year-old friend, smiled broadly at both of us and said that the thirties were a wonderful decade. We continued eating for a moment. After a bit, Sally turned to me and said, "How old are you again? Thirty-eight?" Photograph Trebor Lloyd, 50, had always been drawn to the, and a writer. Then, thanks to a paralegal course, Lloyd became enchanted with the art of persuasion. So at age 42, he decided to go to law school. Last fall, Lloyd started his dream job at a law firm which specializes in intellectual property. Photograph Photograph Marianne Giordani, 43, knows about life lessons. The eldest of five, Giordani left Detroit at age 19. But after a year at the University of Chicago, she headed for New York City and worked as a theatrical set painter before returning to college at age 35. Giordani is currently an English professor working on her Ph.D. // "Thirty-seven," I snapped. Kim's smile drooped-to her, my quick reaction meant that though I was happy to be getting older, I didn't want to be as old as she was. In fact, she's right. I'm enjoying each year far more than I might have imagined possible as a teenager, but that doesn't mean I want as I like my thirties, I'm not giving up a single year before it's time. Paradoxically, I do know that, on most levels, the future looks promising. Given all the fear we seem to have of it, the wondrous news is that getting older is a generally positive thing. We don't just accumulate years, we also gain wisdom which enables us to make decisions with less of the fussing and wheel-spinning that marked our teens and twenties. "I often think the excess energy of youth is nature's way of compensating for a lack of wisdom," says Garfinkel. "All that zip means you don't collapse from all the work of chasing your own tail." As we get older, we know more not only about the world but about ourselves. We have better attention spans and an increased ability to focus. "In general, most nonneurotic older people are content with what they've done with their lives, are happy, have high self-esteem," says Forrest Scogin, Ph.D., of the University of Alabama. "We become more adaptable and flexible, and have a greater understanding of our own resilience." Conventional thinking has always emphasized the miserable, crotchety older person, Scogin adds, but in fact unhappiness is far from the norm. Rates of depression tend to decline after the age of 45, for both men and women. (There's a slight-but temporary-blip in men's rates around the time of retirement.) Other research shows that our sense of what we deem most important for happiness tends to alter appropriately as we age, a sign of the true resilience of the human spirit: We may not look as freshfaced, but we like ourselves more. We actually think fewer negative thoughts. Life becomes simpler. Our priorities shift in a healthy and adaptive fashion. "We care less about our appearance and more about our emotional well-being, our character, and our involvements in the world at large and with those we love," says Connecticut. One other rosy aspect to the future is that as physical attributes become a little less stunning, sex roles begin to blur. Men become more accommodating and emotionally expressive; women more assertive and active in meeting their own needs. With a little less passion, a little less division of roles, and an increase in contentment and openness with one another, relationships in later life tend to become far more important, satisfying, and mutual. On the down side-and, of course, there had to be one-we begin to slow on all fronts. It becomes increasingly difficult to keep up with the energies of a two-year-old, or to add up a series of numbers in one's head. Memory grows less efficient as well. In fact, it's a process that begins between the ages of 18 and 20 but is so slow and subtle that it doesn't become noticeable until around the age of 35. And when we first face the fact that memorizing what we need to do that day lists and otherwise reorder our approach to retaining information. "You tell yourself it's not so important to remember things," says Garfinkel. Photograph Esther Ritz, 54, mother, grandmother, lawyer, ex-fundraiser, and ex-real estate developer, says she believes in "bending with life." Now the Texas native is studying to be a landscape designer. "I always advise people to follow their dreams and to stay out of the sun," she says. // In truth, the worst part of getting older appears to be ageism-the intolerant attitudes of younger people. According to Scogin, "People grow impatient with you for your slowness, even though that decline in speed is appropriate. Think of that driver who makes you crazy when you're trying to get some place. That person isn't being oppositional, as it appears to you. His or her reactions are slower, so it's natural that he or she would drive more cautiously." Of course, older people are as heterogeneous are hot-rodding down the highway, some are doddering along. One can't ever generalize. "BETTER, NOT OLDER okay so if we're supposed to be satisfied with our aging selves, does that mean it's wrong to help nature along, to try and slow down the ravages of time? According to Stone, author of the forthcoming "Happily Ever After: A Guide for Newlyweds," Dying your hair or having collagen injections doesn't really have anything to do with avoiding getting older per se; it's about wanting to feel good about yourself and feel attractive. Its like wearing beautiful lingerie: Nobody else knows you're doing it, but you feel indulged and valuable. That's a reasonable thing to do. "But such self-improvement can go too far," Stone explains. "For example, if a person values his or her attractiveness to the exclusion of other personal characteristics, then the person is loving him or herself from the outside-in rather than the inside-out." That's a problem researches how the lives of very frail elders can be improved, the most important thing we can do to ensure a comfortable and interesting old age is to plan for one. Not simply financially, although that's obviously important. Most of us will spend a good twenty years or more in healthy, active post-retirement, and just expecting to sit on one's heels and rest is hardly a realistic plan for happiness. Don't just daydream about planting a garden, says Kivnick. Learn about gardening, and be ready for the day you'll be free to spend all afternoon with your hands in the dirt. Plan to stay involved in your community, with your family, with whatever has interested and intrigued you thus far. "Perhaps the most important and neglected aspect of getting older is the need to continue giving to others," Kivnick says. "The most unhappy people in the world are those who use retirement to withdraw from involvements, expecting that using their time to concentrate on themselves alone." Researchers at the Duke University Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development concur. Having family and friends isn't the answer to a happy life, but engaging actively with them is. And it seems possible that this involvement can help you live even longer. It's also essential to know yourself. Your personality isn't likely to change so much that it becomes unrecognizable as you get older. Thus you can begin to speculate about the future in practical ways. It's never too early to start considering the basic questions: What's important to me? What life do I most want to live? With whom and where? Would I prefer to stay near my own family or to be in an elder community? Do I want to travel? How will I remain connected to the greater world? What contribution should I make? Once you're no longer bound by the structure of a formal paid job, the whole world can be your oyster. There's no time better than the active, and fruitful later life. Such planning can only add richness to the middle years as well. Says Kivnick, "How we are old depends very much on how we are young." i Photograph Rather than a time of angst, Jim EkLind, 42, says that for him turning 40 was a high point. "I felt ready to take on more responsibility. I married the woman I'd been with for eight years, expanded my business, and we moved from a one-bedroom apartment to one with five bedrooms." Author Affiliation Susan Scarf Merrell is the author of The Accidental Bond: The Power of Sibling Rivalry, out in paperback this January. She has just completed her first novel. //
Section: UNIVISION SPANISH LANGUAGE NETWORK UNIVISION IS A MEDIUM THAT LINKS HISPANICS OF ALL BACKGROUNDS AND NATIONALITIES
HOW CAN YOU BLEND black beans with white potatoes, Andean grapes with tropical mangos, the bolero and the tango, base ball and soccer, cinnamon and Tabasco sauce?
How can you bring together a Puerto Rican who has lived in New York since 1961 with a man from the Dominican Republic who has been driving a taxi in Manhattan for only four years? An Argentine doctor with his Central American patients? Millions of women of all ages and nationalities with Julio Iglesias? Millions of men with Maradona and Jose Canseco? The Pope with his millions of followers, north and south?
How can you entertain such a throng, keep it informed, educate it, make it buy, laugh, or weep -- from the plains of Patagonia to the banks of the Rio Grande? Since the early colonial days, it has been all but impossible to treat the peoples of Spanish America, with their widely differing customs, accents, and complexions, arrival of Univision, the Spanish-language television network "made in the USA," now broadcast in the United States from coast to coast and soon to be on the air throughout the Hemisphere and in Spain as well. 1961: Laying the Foundation
In 1961, station KWEX-TV (channel 41) in San Antonio, Texas, began to transmit programs in Spanish. Since Texas' Spanish-speaking population is predominantly of Mexican background, it is not surprising that this early effort catered to the thinking and tastes of that market. Rene Anselmo, a Bostonian, realized better than anyone else at the time what the new immigrant public wanted: soap operas and music that would remind its members of the land they had left behind when they set out in search of a brighter future.
Anselmo, currently the president of PANAMSAT, a company which provides satellite communication between Latin America, the United States, and Europe, knew Mexico intimately. He had lived there for eight years and had begun his career in the for the Voice of America. In addition, while in Mexico he established close relations with Televisa, the enterprise which dominates TV production and transmission in that country.
In 1961 Anselmo and his Mexican associates set out to win a market in the United States. Would they be able to expand from Texas to other states? Would other Spanish-speaking communities be attracted by Mexican programs, and would it be possible to get mass advertising for Spanish-language programs?
"It was very hard at first," Anselmo recalls. "We had a lot of trouble interesting large-scale advertisers in this country, owing to ignorance and prejudice against Hispanics. 'We have no studies of their marketing tastes,' they would say. 'We don't know whether they comb their hair, whether they use deodorants, or whether they brush their teeth every day.' That was the attitude of many advertisers. We started out transmitting from very rudimentary studios, and our first sponsors were grocery and department store owners who served the immigrant moved ahead, upgrading our programs and making our own market studies to convince unbelievers," Anselmo concluded, smiling with satisfaction. From SIN to Univision
After its experience in San Antonio, the group decided to go for broke. They adopted the name "Spanish International Network" (SIN) and set up offices in New York. Three years later, SIN began broadcasting from station KMEXTV (channel 34) in Los Angeles. Stations in other states came along soon afterwards, and before long SIN was on the air in almost every important Hispanic center in the country.
Geographical expansion and broader programming meant that SIN had to accomodate itself to the two other communities which, along with the Mexican-Americans, make up the bulk of Hispanic immigrants to the United States: the Puerto Ricans in the Northeast, especially New York, and the Cubans in the Southeast, concentrated in Miami. These communities broadened the spectrum of programming from a limited fare of soap operas to include the wide world of sports and archetypes.
Two dates stand out in this first period of expansion: 1968, when the presidential election returns were broadcast for the first time in Spanish, and 1970, when SIN was the first television network in the United States to transmit the World Soccer Cup matches live. By 1978, SIN was connected by satellite to 11 stations of its own, ranging from New York to Florida and Texas to California.
The success of the network can be attributed to three factors: it broadcasts in Spanish; it covers the country from north to south and east to west; and its programming runs the gamut from children's shows to the very competitive field of news. The three principal Hispanic voices in the U.S. have now been thoroughly integrated into the world of communication in Spanish. They are gradually being joined by representatives from other parts of Central and South America. What began as no more than a commercial venture launched by far-sighted businessmen is now the Spanish-language television network, which aims to present a healthy rivalry of accents and idioms.
But the message isn't the only thing that counts in the communications field. Ratings and viewership numbers, sponsors, financing, legal and political factors also have to be taken into consideration. After 27 years of largely Mexican control, SIN's successes attracted the attention of major investors, and in 1987-88 the network was purchased for $630 million. The buyer was a U.S. consortium composed of Hallmark -- the greeting-card company -- and First Chicago Venture Capital. With the takeover, SIN became Univision. Programming a Balancing Act
It takes a special, if not unique, talent to respond to the full range of distinct regional psychologies of Hispanic immigrants. The responsibility has fallen to a woman, the first to have a feel for the whole of the viewing audience -- families, singles, young people, grandparents, coming from all parts of Spanish America.
Rosita Peril rules over a realm in which, as if by magic, each member of this widely Like all famous queens, real or fictitious, Rosita is beautiful, and like queens in fairy tales she can also sing. Indeed, it was as a singer that this Buenos Aires-educated native of Lima started out at SIN. Today, 18 years later, after appearing as an anchor on news programs and as hostess of a show of her own, Rosita Peru is the highest-ranking female in an industry noted for its competitiveness. For eight years she has been the senior vice-president responsible for all programming at Univision. Not surprisingly, she is courted assiduously by each and every Spanish-language program producer.
"I have always been deeply concerned for the quality of what goes out on the air," she says. "Our audience is made up of what means most to us: our families. Our aim in 1990 is to raise our program standards higher and higher. There is a wealth of Latin talent in the United States, lots of it technically trained personnel that can go on to big success produced here in the United States-in Spanish, of course. Another 34 percent originate in Mexico, and 24 percent come from the rest of Latin America. U.S. production will increase enormously once our new studios in Miami are ready. They'll be the biggest in the country." Peril continues: "Our commitment to reach increasingly high levels of programming is evinced by the success of our long-standing regular shows, as well as the numerous music and current events specials we air."
As for sports, she says, "Recently when we telecast the World Soccer Cup matches live from Italy, in addition to our studio staff in Laguna Niguel, California, we had special reporters on the scene in Europe. Each telecast had an average audience rating of 38. At times we reached peaks of 51. If you consider that an audience rating of 51 represents 3,500,000 households, I don't see how you can call that anything but success."
Asked about Univision's penetration into Latin America, to market our product there, and I'm happy to say that our labors of love can now be seen on television in more than 15 countries. This gives us double satisfaction, for we know that Latin Americans who travel back and forth between the U.S. and their native countries can now see many favorite Univision programs on their hometown screens. This strengthens cultural bonds among us." She adds, "We also have some highly ambitious plans for broader presentation on TV in Spain." As for new areas of emphasis, "We are going to give special attention to the world of children, a market in which we are already working actively. We will continue with the specials that have been so successful, such as our Latin music prize contest and our beauty contest. And of course we'll continue turning out the soap operas that have made Univision the favorite network of countless women and indeed whole families."
Rosita is a woman of tireless energy, seemingly born for television. Eighteen of the industry that was still in its infancy; today she is a force to be reckoned with. Her decisions have the potential to reach the entire Latin American population in the United States, which now numbers between 20 and 22 million people. Their buying power -- currently at $130 billion a year -- is the fastest-growing of all minority populations in the U.S. The Visionary at Univision
If Rosita Peru is the heartbeat of Univision, then Joaquin Blaya is its brain. President of the company since 1988, Blaya has spent more than 25 years in the television industry. The 44-year-old entrepreneur was born in Santiago, Chile to a family of newsmen. His grandfather ran an illustrated magazine and was a well-known columnist, and his father put together an FM radio network. Joaquin, however, decided on a career in television, starting out in 1970 as an account executive in SIN's head office in New York City. This brought him into direct -- and indispensable -- contact both with clients and with the temperament led him toward the production area, which was then an open field. It was the moment to test his talent.
After two years he decided to move to Miami, where he pursued a successful career with SIN-associate WLTV (channel 23). In 17 years, first as East Coast manager and then as president, Blaya made WLTV the number-one channel for the Spanish-language market; the station won more than 100 Emmy awards during his stewardship. In Miami, he became the driving force behind Sabado Gigante (a combination game show and pop-singer contest), which tops the list for the Spanish viewing audience, capturing 44 percent or about 2,400,000 households. He also promoted TV Mujer, a morning show aimed at women throughout the country; Cristina, a talk show often compared to Oprah Winfrey's; and most notably Noticiero Univision, generally considered the best Spanish news program anywhere, with foreign correspondents providing live coverage of the most important events worldwide. When SIN was purchased in 1988, Blaya was of president of the Univision network.
1990 was marked by a banner event for Blaya -- live coverage of the World Soccer Cup matches in Italy. For a month the network had more than 6,000,000 spectators over the age of 18 hanging in suspense, a number far exceeding all expectations for the United States.
"We are very proud of the results achieved by our coverage," says Blaya. "The success of the telecasts of the World Cup matches was foreseen commercially six months in advance. By that time we had already sold all the advertising slots available. Univision is happy it was able to bring the best in world soccer to our audience. We are happy too to know that, thanks to our satellite hook-up and cable systems, we now reach 89 percent of the Hispanic households in the United States."
The father of five children, Blaya also has community concerns which have led him to emphasize the problems of Hispanic minorities in the newsmagazine program known as Portada led to the network's co-sponsoring of the international song-contest program Festival OTI de la Cancion, which is a great public favorite. Blaya thinks Spanish-language television has now come of age -- as he said to a Newsweek interviewer, "Univision is watchable." The Future
Unquestionably Univision has fulfilled all of its creators' dreams, far exceeding the hopes they entertained at its birth in 1961. If the road to commercial success was rough, the success achieved has been remarkable. Currently Univision has affiliates in San Antonio, Albuquerque, Dallas, Fresno, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, Phoenix, and San Francisco. Its programs are also carried by stations in Tucson, Austin, Hartford, Philadelphia, Chicago, Corpus Christi, El Paso-Juarez, Houston, Reno, Las Vegas, and Denver; in addition, Univision can be reached on cable in more than 500 locations. The network now counts among its advertisers some of the most important firms in the United States, including Proctor and Gamble,, Coors, American Home Products, Scott Paper, Johnson &; Johnson, Miller's, American Airlines, Coca-Cola, Campbell's Soup, Budweiser, and Kraft, to name but a few.
The new studios being built in Miami represent an all-out gamble on the future. Scheduled to open in late 1990, they cover almost four city blocks near the Doral Country Club -- 5,500 square meters devoted to offices and 6,800 square meters for studios and production facilities. The staff is drawn from all parts of Latin America, from the Chilean president and the Peruvian program director at the top, down through the ranks of news reporters, cameramen, technicians, and artists to the maintenance and cleaning crews. It also includes U.S.-born personnel, who have found better professional opportunities at Univision than in English-language television.
They do a good job and the result is apparent on the TV screen. First-generation Hispanic immigrants feel that Univision is "their" network. Though they may now be citizens of the United States, and their differences from Anglo society which they are anxious to preserve. Their descendants, a generation educated in U.S. schools and constantly exposed to U.S. culture, represent the next challenge of a totally bilingual-bicultural market. No doubt Univision will successfully plug into this hybrid audience as well, projecting new images on an ever-widening wave-length.
PHOTOS (COLOR): Univision success can be attributed in part to its wide variety of programming. Clockwise from bottom opposite page, these range from special music shows such as the annual OTI Internacional competition and Premio Lo Nuestro, to entertainment such as Desde Hollywood, talk shows with popular personality Cristina, soap operas such as Amanda Sabater, game/variety show Sabado Gigante, and the dynamic Noticiero Univision, considered one of the best Spanish news programs in the world
PHOTOS (BLACK &; WHITE): Univision has been energized by two dynamic individuals. Chilean born Joaquin Blaya, top, president of the network since 1988, has led the company forward with vision and drive. The to become the senior vice-president of programming and highest ranking female in the television industry.
By Gustavo Ruprecht

Gustavo Ruprecht has worked in radio and television in the United States, Europe, and his native Argentina for more than 15 years.
BEHIND THE SCREENS
At 10:00 a.m. sharp, I arrive at the Washington office Of Univision's news service. Teletypes and fax machines are running at top speed; phones are ringing everywhere; Federal Express messengers scurry in and out -- the whole battery of modern communications facilities is in full evidence. Satellites and microwaves can not be seen, but one can sense their presence on taking the elevator to the sixth floor of this functionally efficient modern building.
In Suite 601-G, I am met by a woman in her mid-thirties, impeccably dressed in the prevailing Washington, D, C., business style -- a blue gabardine tailored suit and a white silk blouse. Her expression is calm, but she has the alert look and the carefully calculated gestures typical will give me the time I need, but not a minute more. Time is measured not only in money but also in bits of information. The woman's name is Deborah Durham. She was born in Massachusetts and is the head of the Washington bureau of Univision's news service.
"I've been with the network for nine years and feel completely at home working in another language among people who have come from all parts of Latin America to do what they know best -- TV journalism," says Miss Durham. "I work with the Hispanic network as a matter of choice. I feel its news service is the professional equal of any of its English-language counterparts. We're more inclined to be go-getters and in some ways we're better informed. And we're first on the scene of events." She can say this with assurance because she previously worked six years for the highly regarded Public Broadcasting System, and she has taught communications at Hartford University' in Connecticut.
the scene, I'm talking facts. When the Berlin wall came down, when they had elections in Panama, when the invasion took place there, we had reporters and cameramen on the spot right from the start. Our Central American correspondent, Monica Seoane, got an exclusive interview from General Noriega before any U.S. network did, and you know how important Noriega was from the public-opinion standpoint in this country. Events in El. Salvador and Nicaragua, the war against the Colombian drug cartel, the elections in Chile and Argentina -- everything that happens in Latin America shows up on our news broadcasts, monitored live by our own correspondents. I mentioned the Berlin wall first to show that we are not concerned with news of Hispanic interest alone, but that we try to be truly worldwide in our coverage."
"I have a staff of 18 working for me -- reporters and cameramen from Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Colombia, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru, Puerto Rico, same nationality. And yet as you know the news program comes out every day, all in Spanish, and in perfect harmony," says this lively, bicultural newswoman.
"What would you suggest as a closing message to the TV audience and your colleagues in the English-language networks?" I asked just before taking my leave. She gave me a warm smile and, with the assurance of an Olympic finalist, replied: "We are now one of the big five: ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN... and Univision."
PHOTO (COLOR): Deborah Durham of the Washington bureau of Univision's news service heads a staff drawn from a dozen Latin American countries
By Gustavo Ruprecht
From the political to the personal, Americans are caught in an orgy of forgiveness. Failure to pardon, we're constantly admonished, will blight our lives. Now a psychotherapist counters that popular claim. You can refuse to absolve your lover, spouse, parent, sibling or friend, she declares, and still be emotionally healthy. // Flip to any television station these days and chances are we'll be witness to some dramatic episode of forgive ness. We see a mother and daughter estranged for years kiss and make up, a long-feuding couple holding hands and renewing vows, scandal-plagued politicians asking for absolution and granting it to their accusers. Tears flow, hugs proliferate, and the inevitable psychological experts solemnly intone that traditional psychotherapy has neglected this essential element of cure and that studies show that forgiving alleviates depression and enhances self-esteem. What's wrong with this picture? The capacity to forgive is an essential part of an examined life. However, enshrining universal forgiveness as a panacea, a requirement or the only moral choice, is rigid, simplistic and even. Today we demonize not forgiving as much as we idealize forgiving. Failure to forgive, therapists caution, is to "doom yourself to be a victim for the rest of your life," while clergy warn that it inexorably leads to a "recycling of evil." Yet some of the most admirable, sane and emotionally healthy people that I know have not forgiven on occasion. Not forgiving needs to be reconceived. It is not an avoidance of forgiveness or a retreat into paranoia, but a legitimate action in itself, with its own progression, motivation and justification. There are many circumstances in which it is the proper and most emotionally authentic course of action. // I have found that there are three types of healthy unforgivers. For moral unforgivers, refusing means telling the truth, asserting fundamental rights and opposing injustice. Psychologically detached unforgivers accept the painful reality that they can not experience the positive internal connection with a betrayer -- usually a parent-which forgiving would require. Reformed forgivers have faced conflicts between and reject the conventional attitudes they once accepted. None of these three types is vindictive or against forgiveness in principle; they share the capacity to forgive but do not exercise it indiscriminately. MORAL UNFORGIVERS "In my family, the very act of unforgiveness is an extortion of my soul," declares Sandy Katz, a psychotherapist. "It endorses what they did, which was to deny the truth and pressure me to sacrifice myself. For me not to forgive my brother at my parents' behest is my self-affirmation." Sandy's parents had looked the other way when her violent bully of an older brother thrust a screwdriver up her rectum-even when he set her on fire. "Afterward they didn't leave tools or matches lying around, but they never acknowledged what he did to me. He continued to behave this way and they continued to insist that I submit; my mother would say, He's just trying to get close to you because he doesn't know how to be friends of love, and I had no recourse." Parents define a child's world; there is no escape. Unsure of their own reality, children who have no validation and no protection become prisoners mentally as well as physically Not forgiving is a recourse they can create only as independent adults, a way to free themselves from years of being coerced to agree that hate is really love. Under the pressure of promoting family harmony, parents who need to deny one child's viciousness and their own negligence often try to force the victimized child to be "mature" and "rise above it." These more intact, "good" siblings continue to make the same demands of themselves. Their willingness to accept bad treatment, to feel they deserve it, or to define it out of existence then extends beyond their families and damages their later lives. Even those in less extreme circumstances tend to absorb parental values as an unexamined template for their own responses, making it difficult for them to distinguish what. Ten years ago, at age 35, Sandy finally defied her parents by refusing her brother's phone calls. "I started getting guilt-inducing messages from them saying that I was abandoning him and destroying the family. They became increasingly angry and accusatory, haranguing me to forgive and forget without admitting there was anything to forgive and forget. I wrote him a note detailing what he had done and said I wouldn't speak to him until he was willing to acknowledge it. He sent me back a letter taking the moral high ground: that he was just as hurt as I, that all children fight-as if these were normal childhood squabbles-and that he was willing to let bygones be bygones. Why couldn't I?" Sandy hasn't attended a family function with her brother since she received that letter. "I've taken a strong position that he's out of my life, even though my parents still try to bully me into capitulating. I know it's difficult for them to have two talk to me about it because their Pollyanna attitude enrages me." The moral unforgiver makes a distinction between the extreme circumstances where a relationship must be severed and other, more commonplace, injuries. "It's not so much what my brother did as a child, but what he continues to be as a man that I find unacceptable," Sandy explained. "He never changed, never grew, and just found new ways to feel entitled. It would only be right to forgive what he did as a child-it would be legitimate and healthy for everybody But it would be wrong not to hold him responsible for being an undeveloped person now; I would be colluding in creating a false reality, which was what allowed me to be violated in the first place." Contrary to the conventional wisdom, refusing to forgive or have further contact with an unrepentant, abusive relative is therapeutic. "My lack of forgiveness has not impeded my development or my relationships at all; in fact, it's took a stand I was always depressed and acceding to others' needs, always confused about my rights and about what was real." It is commonly believed that forgiving promotes mental health and alleviates depression. But doing the opposite can express a person's very right to live. Responsible unforgivers are never antiforgiveness; Sandy regularly forgives outside her family, even when the offender fails to apologize. "In a good relationship-not a perfect relationship-it's different; how bad are the screwups? If the person is still loving enough it comes naturally." By recognizing the distinction between actions worthy and unworthy of tolerance, and upholding her own moral point of view, a child triumphs over the masochistic role her family assigned her. Her insistence on truth and justice, which lead her to refuse to forgive, is the foundation of her sense of self. Says Sandy of her decision: "I've never had a moment's regret." Proponents of universal forgiveness refuse to recognize that moral unforgivers exist. They outraged but not obsessed by their injuries, that they could even sympathize or retain conditional connections with those they refuse to pardon. What about Sandy's relationship to her parents, who at very least share responsibility for her childhood torment? She has not entirely severed her tie to them, though she holds them culpable. "I need some sense of family, as long as they accept my terms," she explains. "And with this huge exception, they have made genuine efforts in my behalf in recent years." Her attitude toward her parents is one of conditional unforgiveness. So too with Paul Thompson. Paul managed to maintain an uneasy truce with his born-again Christian parents until they announced at a recent press conference, "Our son's homosexuality is worse than a death in the family." The Thompsons are founding members of Return, Incorporated, an international evangelical organization dedicated to converting gay people to heterosexuality. They insist that they "hate the sin and love the sinner," and he is gay, and welcome him as a member of the family. Yet they want him to gainsay his identity and accept their condemnation. Fearful of the destructive power of his own rage, coupled with an unconscious belief that they might be right, prevented Paul from having a confrontation with his parents. His implicit acceptance of their terms perpetuated mutual false forgiveness. "But now," he told me, "they've raised the stakes too high. They actually said that my being gay was a fate worse than death-in essence, that they would rather I had died. When my boyfriend and I broke up and I was devastated, my mother said it was, an answered prayer. They deny that what they're doing is personal and that it's damaging to me; this is hatred masked as love. I won't go any further; it's more a process of mourning than of forgiving them." Paul's parents entrenched, sanctimonious refusal to admit their hostility is a of his sexual orientation is one thing; to wage a conversion campaign while insisting that they are acting out of compassion alone is another. Without asking his son's permission, Mr. Thompson wrote and self -- published Psalms for Sorrowing Parents, a book that included intimate letters his son had written to him. "I sobbed when he gave me a copy," Paul said. He refused his father's subsequent request to be pardoned for invading his privacy, the only offense Mr. Thompson would ever admit. "I won't do it because it's just a ritual for him, not blood and guts. Real forgiveness has to be based on working to change; he wants me to forgive him for what he's going to keep doing." In the complex relations between parents and child, affection and hostility and pride and disappointment always coexist. To label an ongoing transgression unforgivable does not necessarily obliterate all positive ties. "Despite their fanaticism, fundamentally they love me very deeply," Paul, although he will not underwrite his parents' behavior by forgiving it, neither will he abandon them in retaliation; mature separation is not amputation. He has decided to maintain occasional contact with them, provided Return, Incorporated, is not mentioned. "Complete detachment isn't any more healthy than fusion-but I won't be careful or quiet any longer." Partial nonforgiveness requires a person to bear alone the burden of intense ambivalence and continuing grief. The illusion of family harmony is lost forever, but it is replaced with something limited, painful and real. DETACHED UNFORGIVERS Anybody who struggles with intimate betrayal must reengage with the experience, actively choosing to think and to feel what was once unbearable. But understanding need not lead to forgiveness. Indeed, it is a major accomplishment for some men and women to temper their hatred and tolerate their indifference. For the sake of their own emotional survival, they can do no more. Disengaging from a fatally flawed parent or intimate, sometimes seems to come naturally anything but contempt for her father. "He was a selfish brute who considered his children his property. Once when I was a teenager, he said, "I can do anything I want with you" - and he would have if my uncle hadn't threatened to call the police." Annie's uncle, a blind biologist who lived with the family, was her protector, mentor and soulmate. "He taught me how to think," she said. Annie discussed what must have been a miserable situation with scientific detachment, and not a hint of recrimination. Throughout our interview, she referred to her father as "this guy," and seemed surprised when I asked what qualities she had inherited from him. "I'm my uncle's daughter," she said. Many children who had a poisonous parent identify someone else as their "real" parent. Under the right circumstances, a traumatic past can be left behind without being consciously mourned. Living with a beloved, always knew we would be better off without my father and my uncle agreed with me," Annie said - made her solution possible. Still, no daughter is born despising her father; what became of her original love? "You have deep feelings, but they get lost," Annie admitted. "What love there was initially got strangled." As Annie matured, her fear and hatred evolved into indifference, and though she still speaks of her father with distaste, she is not bitter. "People are much too willing to blame others. Since I moved out 30 years ago, my life has been what I make of it-I'm responsible." A self -- reliant attitude, the opposite of vengefulness, circumscribes the influence of a bad father. Annie was away on a fellowship when her father died, and she had no qualms about not coming back for the funeral; in their last conversation he had berated her for not going to medical school. Annie is the first to acknowledge that It took me a long time to feel men could be trusted," she said-but she claims never to have been disturbed by her unwillingness to reconcile with her father. "I never felt the slightest need to do it." Though friends and therapists have repeatedly warned her that her unforgiving attitude would eventually be her downfall, she isn't afraid they're right. "People try to convince me that because I didn't make peace with him I'd suffer for it down the line; they feel that there hasn't been closure. I think it's more about them and their own fathers. I'm fine. It hasn't been a trauma for me." For others to find Annie wanting because of what she has not done is an imposition of alien values. Annie is a woman at peace, at a price that does not seem excessive. For many others, however, achieving that sort of detached peace does not come as easily. Jessica Kramer was devastated when a close "She died of cancer when I was 38 and I was mostly glad to be rid of her," she says. Jessica's distancing from her mother started at an early age. "She was cold, uninvolved, and rejecting and never interested in me," says Jessica. "By age five, I had given up on her. I was never sure whether she hated me or was just indifferent. I was a burden and a competitor." Her mother was so detached from Jessica that she was surprised to notice that her 28-yearold daughter was left-handed and so mean-spirited that she used the money earmarked for Jessica's education to speculate in real estate. Jessica initially blamed herself for her mother's inability to respond and condemned herself for despising her mother. And her lack of grief at her mother's death made her question her own character; what kind of a daughter-what kind of a human being-was she? We are, after all, commanded by scripture to honor our mothers and fathers. Not to do so is unnatural, we are led to believe. "To mourn my friend and not my mother seemed like what a monster feels," recalls Jessica. "It was a shining moment when my analyst said, 'It's okay to love your friend more than your mother.' What had been disturbing me was not so much that she didn't love me but that I didn't love her. Not loving her meant I was like her, a person incapable of love. When I realized that I didn't love her because she didn't love me, I understood that I could still love. I haven't forgiven her, but I'm not angry anymore. She had some nice qualities, like liveliness. But in the most important way, she was never really my mother." In the conventional view, the decision to forgive must not be based on whether the perpetrator deserves it; only then can the independent will of the victim be guaranteed. In betrayer expresses a person's right to his or her own feelings. Recognizing that you are under no obligation to profess love you do not feel is a hard-won freedom. REFORMED FORGIVERS We tend to think of forgiveness as the best, healthiest way to resolve an intimate injury, and of learning to forgive as one of life's greatest lessons. Sometimes the opposite is true. Learning not to forgive, after a life in which forgiveness has been compulsive, imposed or unconsidered, is an impressive achievement. Daily life provides many circumstances where offensive and unchangeable behavior should not be excused and where forgiving is confused with submerging normal reactions to mistreatment. Yet even when the culprit is a peer and not a parent, and the injury is mundane, it can take years for a person to stop extending second chances. Rita Bergman reversed her lifelong tendency to do what she was told when she turned 75. "As I've grown older I've begun to think more about what I need. Screw it, exclaimed. The object of Rita's newfound insight was an old friend who had become so obnoxious and critical that she was offending everyone she knew." I felt terribly sorry for her. She hasn't been the same person since she lost her husband and son a few years ago, and she's all alone. "Repeated infuriating lunches, in which every aspect of her appearance was scrutinized and found wanting, made Rita vow to sever the tie, but she always ended up reconsidering for old times' sake. Only after Rita's closest friend refused to see her if this woman accompanied them did Rita realize enough was enough, stopped making the dates she had come to dread, and ended the relationship. As with more serious injustices, understanding the source of someone's inexcusable behavior-even feeling sympathy for her plight-does not justify endless exposure to it; there is a fine line between compassion and compliance." I don't believe in carrying grudges at this point in my life, "Rita said my own feelings? I was always very timid and never opened my mouth, but now that has changed." Rita's refusal to overlook her unfortunate friends hostility any longer is an act of self-respect that took a lifetime to attain. Forgiving without reconciling is acceptable; why not reconciling without forgiving? People often wound one another in the name of truth; a person has a right to employ judicial dishonesty to protect him- or herself against being wounded by others. Sarah Goodman recently reversed her pattern of placating her older sister Wendy. Stricken with a rare cancer in childhood, married to a repugnant layabout, Wendy has lived a life of bad luck and bad judgment. Sarah's duties as the "good" daughter included overlooking Wendy's rages and insults in childhood, and not objecting when as an adult Wendy refused to help care for their dying father. "I was the one who was always pressured to do the right thing," Sarah said. "That was my script. I'dn't and won't do it anymore; her problems are not my fault, and the way she vanished when our father got sick was inexcusable. I used to cry and curse her; now I'm civil. I'm no longer capable of forgiving her, whether she deserves it or not." Sarah's cordiality toward her sister, which she maintains for her mother's sake, is a conscious pretense on her part and her best defense; she has decided that confrontation is too costly. "It never worked in the past, and now if I tell her how I feel I'll be punished. I don't wish her harm, but I want nothing to do with her on an emotional level." Sarah frankly admits she derives secret pleasure in the privacy of her own heart from no longer turning the other cheek. Her customized solution involves a measure of hypocrisy, without self-delusion. Unforgiving reconciliation is an ethical form of retribution. Like other responsible types of unforgiveness, it provides's funeral I saw what a miserable person she was, a tormented soul who hasn't connected to anybody," Sarah recalled with more sadness than satisfaction. "I feel that really wonderful sense of indifference you have when you break up with somebody and you think you'll never get over the pain, and then one day you bump into each other on the street and wonder how you ever felt that way" Refusing to be what a priest might call "the bigger person" freed Sarah to be her own person. Forgiveness and unforgiveness are not polar opposites but points on a continuum. The same internal processes can lead to emotionally authentic resolutions in either direction. Anyone who has gone through the profound and punishing process of conscious forgiving or not forgiving emerges more self-aware, more related to others, and less burdened by the past. When it is genuine, forgiveness is a capacity not a compulsion; this is why the same person can grant it or withhold it, depending on the circumstances. de Stael was wrong. Understanding need not lead to forgiveness-but it can lead to wisdom. Sidebar A Q &A; WITH JEANNE SAFER:, Ph .. D. Sidebar What got you interested in forgiveness? Partly personal experience. When I was 16, I discov Sidebar ered my father virtually in flagrante with two young women in our home. I've wanted to understand not just what happened to me, but how I reacted to it. I never set out consciously to forgive; what I wanted was to free myself from my own anger toward him and my mother. Then, too, in 25 years as a psychotherapist, I've seen many people struggling with both intimate betrayals and our culture's insistence that forgiveness is the only "right" resolution. The pressure everyone feels to forgive everything and everybody is responsible for a proliferation of false forgiveness. 4' How do real and false forgiveness differ? A: Forgiving is hard work. It takes time, and involves Sidebar pain. It's not just forgiveness is going through the motions without anything changing on the inside. It's lip service, and it actually interferes with authentic resolution and estranges people from their real feelings. Forgiveness should be a capacity to be exercised when the situation warrants it, not a compulsion to be applied indiscriminantly. And no one-including a parent, a mental health professional or a member of the clergy-has the right to dictate Sidebar how a betrayal should be resolved. Unfortunately, most therapists have been brainwashed to believe that Sidebar forgiveness is the only correct solution, and naturally they encourage their patients to do it, out of genuine, if misplaced, concern for their mental health. e 0 What should therapists be doing? They should help their patients come to terms with the Sidebar past in whatever way is right for the individual. Often, people need permission not to forgive. Pushing an agenda of Sidebar automatic absolution leads many to secret despair. Therapy should teach people to think for themselves. What's the role of religion Judeo-Christian Sidebar tradition. But forgiving need not be related to religious confiction; for some its a matter of ethics. But the religious imperative to forgive makes many people feel guilty if they don't or can't. They're told that they are being vengeful. Is vengeance distinct from not forgiving? 4. Absolutely Vengeance is holding onto rage and bit Sidebar terness, letting a sense of victimization rule your life; choosing not to forgive involves profound self-examination, just like forgiveness-only with a different conclu Sidebar sion. Vengeance is actually more closely related to false forgiveness than it is to genuine nonforgiveness. There is a difference, though: pseudoforgivers can not wait to change the subject, and the vindictive can not stop talking about it. What does resolving an intimate betrayal require? A' It's a three-step process. Sidebar First, you must reengage with the hurtful relationship. Then, you have to recognize its emotional impact. Finally you have to reinterpret its meaning from a broader perspective. In my as an adolescent, and realized how much I had buried and misinterpreted. Did you forgive your parents? Yes, and myself, for what happened between us. But Sidebar it's important to recognize that another daughter with a similar history could have legitimately decided not to forgive. There is no one-size-fits-all solution. //
"... I BEGAN MY CAREER BEFORE I WAS AWARE OF MAGAZINES AND THE POWER THOSE IMAGES HAVE ON YOUNG WOMEN..." Photograph // The life of a supermodel often conjures images of diva designers, bacchanalian parties and jet-set extravagance. This stereotype makes models a symbol of excess, the poster children of hedonism. But when we look at the human behind the caricature, the question arises: How does a person caught up in the swirl of celebrity, money and parties at a young age manage to keep a sense of balance? The question is even more pressing when you consider that the industry is littered with people who weren't able to survive the onslaught. Even while she was an unwilling symbol of over-thetop glamour, Christy Turlington was an anomaly in the fashion world, a polite professional who avoided arrogance and attitude. "Christy's uniqueness is a combination of maintaining personal dignity and a very firm grip on manners," explains Kurt Markus, a photographer who has worked with Turlington for years. "I have seen her tested over and over. family and early years. She is a rock." Education and charity have been important aspects of Turlington's life. After spending 10 years in the spotlight of the beauty culture, she chose the anonymity of life as a student at New York University. She enjoyed studying literature and religion and graduated cum laude with a degree in philosophy. Turlington has responded to the wealth her beauty has given her by working tirelessly for charities that support children (Art Inspiring Hope), education (Intercambios Culturales of El Salvador), animal rights (PETA) and several anti-tobacco campaigns. Most important, she has had to face tobacco addiction, illness and death. When she quit smoking and subsequently gained 10 pounds-and the reproach of the industry-her response was insightful." It led me to rethink my career. I would rather be 10 pounds heavier, tobacco-free and happy," she said. "Later, after her father died of lung cancer and she was diagnosed with early stage emphysema, Turlington devoted herself to many commercials for us," says Susan Islam of the American Cancer Society."She was doing it because she lost her father, and that made a real difference. I think it has more impact when a celebrity devotes that much time because they have a personal interest." Turlington finds much of her strength in yoga, meditation and Ayurveda, an ancient holistic science from India. Many of the Ayurvedic principles are based on discovering your balance as an individual. The philosophy holds that every person is a hybrid of the three elements called doshas (vatta, pitta and kappa). Understanding your unique combination can help you choose how to exercise and what to eat. Finding the flexibility and balance that is required for good mental health is a challenge we all face. Psychology Today recently interviewed Turlington about how she has maintained her equilibrium in a life of extremes. How have you dealt with loss in your life? Yoga has helped me to see death as more of a gift than a loss, has been the best tool for managing stress and life's challenges. Everything from my studies to my father's death was eased by my practice of it. How long have you been practicing yoga and how did you start? I went to my first yoga class at 18. A friend was doing it, and I admired the discipline and focus. I decided I wanted that positive focus in my life to help me cope with the erratic lifestyle my career perpetuates. It was, and remains, an invaluable source of energy and inspiration for me, and all of my efforts in life, both personal and professional. How have you adjusted your life according to Flyurveda? It has been an organic evolution. Through my practice of yoga I was drawn to Ayurveda, a sister philosophy, and also to things that are generally better for me. My diet, and also the way that I respond to the world and the world to me, has gradually changed. What is your dosho, and a vata/pitta, which means that my constitution is generally pitta, hard-working, a leader, but I also have a vata imbalance, which is revealed in my skin type. I have dry skin and a small bone structure, a lot of creative energy and I speak very quickly. This is just a snapshot of how dosha qualities affect me physically, but Ayurveda is a very complex science that is 5,000 years old. We all have all three doshas and all five elements of nature in each of us in varying degrees, which makes each of us an individual. You left the catwalk in 1994 and returned to school in 1997. Did you feet you were tired of the beauty culture? I haven't left modeling completely; I just took a step out, and I now have the rare luxury of picking and choosing how to spend my days. I wanted to explore so many other interests that I had and still do have, and that was not possible as a full-time model. I it would be so hard or take so long. At 26, I knew I was ready and that the transition would only become harder, so I just did it. It was the best thing I ever did, apart from quitting smoking, and it gave me so much self-knowledge. It allowed me to see that I could do whatever I wanted to do going forward. Studying philosophy and religion seems miles away from the modeling routine-was it something you wanted to do for a while? How did your studies shape your perspective on what you wanted to do when you graduated? Everything I read in school, from Nietzche to Hannah Arendt and Victor Frankel, helped shape the way I see the world, but I was particularly drawn to religious, mystical, spiritual texts and scripture, which reiterated the essentials of life that I hold valuable. My study of religion, philosophy and art, plus my practice of yoga and my career as a model, all brought me to where I am today. to my businesses, Sundari and Nuala. How is your clothing specifically designed for yoga? Nuala was designed for the lifestyle of yoga, not just the practice of postures that most people associate with yoga, but the clothing had to withstand a vigorous practice as well. It was important for me to make clothes that transcended the boundaries of the workplace and working out, the external and internal experiences, travel and home life. Why do these activities need to be contradictory? I designed the collection for my lifestyle, and I have found that many women were also searching for the same thing. You started a modeling career at 14 years old. How did you maintain a sense of balance and continue to develop as a person in that atmosphere? I only modeled after school until 16 and then summers until 18 when I graduated, so I always maintained a fairly normal life as a teen. Photograph // However, I was living a double life of sorts, with travel and exposure to the world, but my mother frequently accompanied me until I was an adult. After being associated with the rise of the "supermodel," how did it feel to move away from the spotlight and the fashion industry? That was one of the best things I ever did. I needed more intellectual stimulation, which I found the spotlight a distraction to. Without it, I could further evolve as a person. What did you learn about women's relationship to beauty from the time you spent in the fashion industry? Nothing. I think each woman has her own relationship to beauty. I began to understand this after I made the decision to step outside the profession to continue my studies. Life teaches you your opinion about these matters, not modeling. It just is not real or broad enough to provide the answers to those questions. How were you able to avoid many of the difficult body-image issues that models deal with? I guess I am fortunate in that I have maintained a very healthy self-image throughout aware of magazines and the power those images have on young women. And, when I was in the midst of that world and working with talented people, I simply entrusted them to worry about the way I looked. You have been active with many charities-which ones are most important to you? There are so many important causes in the world, but I have learned that I can be most effective through my anti-tobacco work. It has been great because it has turned so many personal negatives into positives for me. I was addicted to tobacco for many years and then lost my father to lung cancer due to his addiction to the substance. Now I can share my experience and struggle and encourage others to take better care of themselves. I also continue to help a variety of other not-for-profit, grassroots organizations in areas involving children, education, the environment and animal rights, but given my time constraints and desire to focus on making the most impact, anti-tobacco remains my platform. What has your involvement are from there, so I wanted to help when the war ended and the country was going through transitions. I continue to support cultural- and health-related organizations and earthquake relief. We are doing a story in this issue about how obsession with the culture of beauty can make healthy romantic relationships problematic. Have you ever experienced this? I think a relationship is not healthy if too much emphasis is focused on beauty. Obsession of any kind is intrinsically unhealthy. What are some qualities you look for in an ideal partner? Openness, kindness, compassion, adventure, humor. What do you value most in your closest relationships? The same, but I will settle for two or three. Photograph "MY MOTHER AND HER FAMILY ARE FROM EL SALVADOR, SO I WANTED TO HELP WHEN THE WAR ENDED AND THE COUNTRY WAS GOING THROUGH TRANSITIONS" Sidebar Snapshots of Christy Sidebar 1969 Born on January 2, in Walnut Creek, California 1983 Discovered by photographer Dennie Cody while horsebackriding in Coral Gables, Florida; her chain store Emporium Capwell Sidebar 1985 At age 16, Eileen Ford sent Christy to New York's most noted magazines and photographers 1986 fl cover shot for Vogue in Italy established her as a highprofile model 1994 Quit runway modeling 1997 Enrolled at New York University Sidebar 1998 Key witness in Senator Lautenberg's national field hearing on tobacco 1999 Sidebar May: Graduated cum laude from New York University with a Bachelor of Arts in philosophy and comparotive religion July. Hiked Africa's highest peak, Mount Kilimanjaro, publishing her travel journal in Condo Nast's WOMEN'S SPORTS ay FITNESS October: Launched a skin-care line, Sundari, with two other partners 2000 Launched Nuala, a yoga-practiceinspired lifestyle collection, with Puma //
FEEDBACK // THE LOVE PROJECT Editor's Note: By the time you read this, I will probably have received more than a thousand letters in response to my June editorial, "Editor as Guinea Pig: Putting Love to a Real Test." Here's a sampling, followed by letters on other topics. -R. E. If you put yourself into the experiment, you risk your credibility as a researcher. How will you keep your professional detachment and objectivity in a subject that addicts one to another, accelerates the mind and distorts perception? Frank Holloway Lawrenceville, NJ I am 28 years old, single and no longer discouraged-because of you. I have been involved in passionate relationships that have lasted only a few months and then fizzled when the passion subsided. I knew these relationships were a waste of time, and it is comforting to know that I was right. Good luck to you in your quest. You are truly an inspiration. J. P. Via e-mail Hats off to you. Fourteen years ago, I worked for a matchmaking service. Being believed that a perfect foot existed for every glass slipper presented by those men. Perhaps the "knight in shining Porsche" isn't as gender biased as you might be led to believe.We observed that the men were far more receptive to unconventional methods of meeting a mate than the women. Lori Hinton Springdale, AR I read your quest to marry for more "practical" reasons. My husband and I did just that.We both had many common interests that we thought would make us good partners. Sometimes, though, I have felt like I've wanted more. I think that society has something to do with my partially unrealistic expectations of wishing we were more like "soul mates." Perhaps if married people talked more openly, it would help. I wish you success. Kristine Shultis Via e-mail I agree with you. We woo our prospective spouses through a dating system where we are continually wearing a mask of "how we want to be known." In a prearranged marriage, the couple learnsn't have to unlearn the mask. I've been searching for a Russian wife. These marriages have a divorce rate of between 5 and 10 percent, much better than what we are accustomed to. I suppose these are semi -- prearranged marriages with no false perceptions to unlearn. Martin Sacramento, CA This "experiment" would involve a huge amount of sharing. gaining an intimate understanding of another person; facing fears; finding the "treasures" within each other; leaving what doesn't work and creating what does; learning how to be open and honest.All of which can produce great joy. Even though your experiment sounds crazy, I keep hearing the words of Zorba the Greek "A man needs a little madness, lest he dare not cut the rope and be free" J.B. Auckland, New Zealand If I subscribe to the theory that creating love is a very conscious choice (and I do), then what you propose has awesome possibilities.Writing about the experience will surely bring a deeper understanding between sustaining it is the issue.When you find the answer, it will be of tremendous use to humanity.You are bold and brave to commit to this process. I applaud your resolve.You are definitely a love pioneer; you and your chosen partner are in for an adventure. Michelle Laguna Beach, CA The reason for the lower divorce rate (for arranged marriages) in developing countries is the stigma attached to women who seek separation and the slim chance of success in a second marriage.Where there is education and emancipation of women, you'll find an increase in the incidence of divorce. Any system is as good as the individuals concerned in the process. P. N. S. Mani Via e-mail Your idea is very interesting, and the out-of-the-box thinking is even better. Wow. I work with patients who live in a polygamist Mormon community and I have always been interested in their way of life (the arranged-marriage part, not the multiple-wife part). These adults seem to be much happier with each other than married adults (who may be onto something. Dr. Karon Lynn Flagstaff AZ THE END OF HATE I loved your article "Why We Hate" (June 2002). wish every American could read this article. Maybe some of us would see how wrong it is to judge people as a whole.As Carl Rogers would point out, every individual must be shown unconditional positive regard. We need to remember that although we may have roots in other areas of the world, we are all Americans. // Wendi Lane Travis Air Force Base, CA DEAR DIARY Thank you for the article "Dear Mother" (June 2002). My mother passed away two years ago and I have had similar feelings. Although my mother and I were close, I regret not spending more time with her. I hope my mother knows how much I will always love her. You have inspired me to write my memories and new experiences in a diary to my mother. Daniela Friedman Toronto, Canada COVER BOY: NOAH WYLE Thank you for putting). know that psychology is now a female-dominated profession and that females are more emotionally aware than males.While women are more likely to be your audience, some men are still interested in psychology. Noel Mathiesen Armidale, New South Wales, Australia LOVE IS EVERYWHERE I enjoyed reading the article "Love Is Not All You Need" (June 2002). However, I could not help but notice that all six couples profiled in the article were opposite gender. Gays, lesbians and bisexuals are frequently made invisible in our society. However, they still love and still have relationship difficulties. It was clear that the authors of the article made an effort to include a diverse range of couples. Adding a same-gender couple would have been a useful addition to the story. Laurie Pollack Philadelphia, PA UNEXPLAINED After reading the article "Galvanizing Ghosts" (June 2002), I recalled how researchers of the paranormal classify certain activities as "ghosts of memory." People have reported seeing ghosts reenacting the same kinds of all ghostly apparitions as projections of our own minds.We need to remain open on this subject; we still don't have all the answers. Paul Dale Roberts Elk Grove, CA

Perinatal Substance Exposure can cause a wide range of serious medical complications for an infant, including withdrawal, physical and neurological deficits, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, growth retardation, cardiovascular abnormalities including hypertension and strokes, spontaneous abortion and premature delivery, and long-term developmental abnormalities. Newborns exposed to crack cocaine constitute a special health crisis of staggering proportions in many communities.
In order to effectively address the problems presented by prenatal substance exposure, an adequate system of medical, social, and related health care services to the substance exposed infant and its mother must exist. Without an increased focus on prevention and early intervention, the problem of substance exposed infants will continue to grow, and the nation will continue to reap the tragic harvest of this problem. With adequate services and a coordinated system of care, intrusive intervention might be avoided. 1
Many advocates and experts that have examined the problems of newborns exposed to drugs in utero have called for a "new" comprehensive services delivery system that is available, accessible, includes drug abuse prevention services, prenatal care, experts contend that this "new" delivery system must provide services in a complementary and consistent manner, and that the services should be timely and family-centered. This "new" system may turn out to be an "old" system -- Public Health Nursing.
Public Health Nursing practice dates back to the early days of the Henry Street Settlement in New York, in 1893. It was felt then, and it is true now, that poor women and children benefit from the information, education, and personalized services provided by a neighborhood nurse. The focus of Public Health Nursing services over the past decade shifted to more vulnerable populations -- but the mission is still the same.
It is a dynamic discipline combining nursing and public health theory. Public Health Nurses work in the family setting promoting health and preventing disease through the nursing process: assessing a family's strengths and weaknesses, planning a strategy to remedy unhealthy behaviors, intervening to prevent further abuse, and evaluating family outcomes. Public Health Nurses models. These models hold promise for treating substance abusing women and their children -- but before they can be implemented, nurse training programs must be developed and treatment protocols must be established.
In 1989, the California Association of Public Health Nursing Directors, in collaboration with the California Conference of Public Health Nursing Directors, developed a policy paper and protocols for services to families with substance exposed infants. Two plans were designed. The first focuses on the caregiver and includes parents, relatives, or foster parents; the second focuses on the infant from birth through thirty-six months of age. The Nursing Care Plans include the categories of assessment, action/intervention, and expectation/outcome. The new assessment and intervention protocols are used for referring problems and may include the areas of physical, developmental, psychosocial, and environmental deficiencies. Psychosocial assessment and interventions focus on parenting behavior related to attachment, capacity of caregivers to meet their own needs, physical care of the infant, supervision and discipline of the infant, and health care and changes anticipated, given a specific nursing intervention, and then measure the actual consequence exhibited by the caregiver and infant. For example, the nursing assessment reveals a wailing infant and exhausted mother. The Public Health Nurse determines that the infant is being overstimulated by the mother and the environment and, therefore, role models a "quiet" feeding and turns off the television and turns down the lights. Explanation regarding overstimulation is given. The infant is soothed, feeds calmly, and falls asleep. A telephone call to the mother the following day reveals she has continued the newly learned behavior, the infant reportedly is less irritable, and the mother states she is more rested.
Substance exposed infants are likely to have medical complications and special care needs. Depending on the extent of prenatal drug exposure, the age of the fetus at the time of exposure, and other health risk factors during the pregnancy, the infant may exhibit behaviors that are different from other exposed infants. Interventions that work for one infant are guidelines to assist and enhance planning and decision-making when dealing with alcohol and other substance exposed infants and their mothers or foster families, but they are not a substitute for professional judgement. 2
To help make these vital assessments, many nurses use the conceptual framework of Kathryn Barnard's Child Health Assessment Interaction Theory. 3 Her theory views the parent and child as an interactive and adaptive system. This interactive system between the mother and her infant creates an environment with the potential to effectively support, nurture and stimulate the infant. For example, the infant sends cues to the mother about hunger and sleepiness without spoken words. Similarly, the infant responds to the mother. When the effects of drugs impede an infant's ability to send clear cues and respond favorably to the mother, her ability to respond appropriately may be inhibited. Caretaking then, can either moderate or perpetuate earlier health or developmental difficulties. Early intervention and parenting education, here, by Public Health Nurses can prevent delays in growth and development. Training (NCAST), research-based tools also developed by Kathryn Barnard and her colleagues at the University of Washington School of Nursing. Since 1986, the California Association of Public Health Nursing Directors has offered a thirty hour training course to Public Health Nurses in the use of NCAST. Over 800 nurses in the State of California have been trained in the use of this tool. NCAST contains four nursing assessment tools: a feeding scale, a teaching scale, a home environment scale, and a sleep activity record. NCAST focuses on maternal infant interaction and provides a structure for improving parenting skills. In addition to expanding the nurse's skill level, the inter-rater4 reliability allows counties in California to perform joint research with several other states. This research has concentrated on the use of structured interventions and outcomes with high risk infants. Very few studies exist on perinatal substance abuse and the substance exposed infant; these studies should provide a very rich data base for future improvements in assessment models.
In addition to assessment models mothers and infants. Two Public Health Nurses in Santa Clara County, in cooperation with the Drug Abuse Bureau, have been teaching prenatal classes to drug addicted pregnant mothers. The classes are taught in an effort to help these women maintain healthy, drug free pregnancies. The prenatal and postpartum classes taught by the Public Health Nurses to pregnant women under treatment for addiction include: birth control methods; sexually transmitted diseases; common discomforts of pregnancy; danger signs in pregnancy; nutrition in pregnancy; labor and delivery; infant care; tour of labor and delivery rooms at a local hospital; the effects of drugs &; alcohol on pregnancy; comforting a substance exposed infant; early parenting and infant care; stresses of having a new baby and the risks of returning to drug use. Referrals from the classes are made to Public Health Nurses in the appropriate district of office who then make home visits to these women before and after they deliver their babies. PHNs provide instruction conducive to changing lifestyles by 1) goal-setting; parenting roles. 5
The class instructors have found that the addicted women under their treatment are like all mothers -- they truly want to have a healthy baby. Unfortunately, the desire for a healthy baby is complicated by a powerful addiction and overwhelming odds against recovery. The tragedy of drug abuse-characterized by chronic or periodic compulsive, uncontrolled substance use -- is a treatable disease. Support services can help these women concentrate on their recovery. Public Health Nurses can provide that support link between treatment programs and the home environment to ensure enhancement and continuity of care so that addicted women can have more positive pregnancy outcomes. 6

FOUR STEPS TO HARD DISK POWER
A couple of years ago, 20 megs seemed like a lot of storage. But nowadays everything burns up disk space at a furious rate. Windows 3.0 takes up 5 or more megabytes, Lotus several more-heck, even Wing Commander, a game with unbelievable graphics, can only manage those graphics by taking up 5 megs on your disk.
So it's time for an upgrade. You buy a larger disk and don't want to pay to have it installed. Here's how to put in your first hard drive or add a second hard drive.
One caveat before we go further. There is a wide variety of controllers, drives, and interfaces, so one article can't cover them all. What follows will tell you how to install most hard drives. Here are the basic steps to the process: Gather the information you'll need before you start. Configure the hard drive. Install the hard drive. Install the drive controller.
I'll also assume that you know that board called a hard drive controller, and cables. The controller has to be compatible with the hard drive, or this whole operation isn't going to work.
If you're not clear on how to buy a controller and drive, take a look at "How to Choose a Hard Disk" in the May 1991 issue. Getting Ready
There are a few things you'll need to know about your drive later on, so let's get this information together before we go any further.
Find whatever documentation came with the drive, controller, and PC. You want to know the heads, cylinders, sectors per track, and write precompensation cylinder for your drive because the controller needs to know that data in order to support your drive. So get this from your vendor and write it down somewhereyou'll probably have use for it even after the drive is installed.
Most drives have a paper label pasted on them with a bad track table or error map. It describes defect. I'm looking currently at a Seagate ST251-1, a popular 42MB drive. It has a white paper label atop it marked Error Map. The label looks like this: TABLE
The three columns are labeled Cyl (Cylinder), Hd (Head), and BFI (Bytes From Index). As the disk spins, there is an arbitrary starting point that is the index-BFI is the distance from this index. (Note an oddity of the table: It sees an error on head 3 for tracks 137, 140, and 141 at the same BFI. It seems highly likely that an error exists also on tracks 138 and 139. Personally, I'd treat head 3, -BFI 2463 as bad for cylinders 138 and 139.)
The last suggestion for this installation phase is to collect documentation. There's no sense in tearing the computer apart only to realize that you never got the information on configuring the controller and that you won't get any further until you beg the even if you convince the company to send it, you'll look strange lurking around the mailbox waiting for the mail carrier. (Actually, most controller vendors have 24-hour-a-day BBSs from which you can download your controller documentation and other information.) Opening the Computer
There's a good chance you'll have to get into your computer before going much further, since most AT-class machines (286-, 386SX-, 386-, and 486-based PCs) have their hard disk controller and hard disk cables already in the machine. Here are some tips on getting inside the machine with a minimum of trouble. Take your time, and write everything down.
Make a bootable DOS disk. If you don't have a bootable DOS floppy, make one now with everything on it that you'll need to boot the system. If you're replacing a hard disk, you probably always boot from the hard disk and don't have a bootable floppy handy. Make one, and make sure that it has the things's an AT machine, whatever low-level format program you'll be using, FDISK, and FORMAT.
Park your drive's heads. If you're removing an old hard disk, park it first. You should have a head-parking program around somewhere.
Turn the computer off, and remove the cover. Leave the PC plugged in, however, but be sure to provide antistatic protection, as I'll explain in a minute.
Be especially careful when removing the cover that you don't rip any ribbon cables on the edge of the cover. The ribbon cables for the floppies and hard drive often pop up as the cover is removed, making them easy prey for any sharp edges on the inside of the case.
Also, find an egg carton and use it to help you organize the screws that you take out of the computer. You can use the compartments in the carton to keep the different screws separated. You'll probably find two or three sizes of screws in your ones that secure the hard drive, and mediumsized ones that fasten everything else.
Ground yourself. Before you touch anything in the computer, touch the case of the power supply. (Don't know which is the power supply? It's the silver box with the fan in it and the power switch on the side. It's also got a label on it that says sometimes in several languages- "If you open me, I'll kill you.")
Touching the power supply case drains away any static electricity that you might have built up. This only works if the power supply is plugged in.
Heed this warning: In 1989, I lived in The Condo from Hell for three months. It had the most static-attracting carpet I've ever seen in my life. I was working on a computer and absent-mindedly shuffled my feet on the carpet while trying to work out a problem. I reached over to remove a memory board from the system, and zap! A the board. Killed two memory chips and probably weakened others.
Get in the habit of touching the power supply case. (No, you won't get electrocuted by touching the case of the power supply. Just don't open it up-that can kill you.)
Remove the hard drive. If you already have a hard drive, remove it and the controller. You can find the controller easily-just follow the ribbon cables from the back of the hard disk to a circuit board. That circuit board is the controller. It'll probably look like a pincushion, as it usually sports a 34-pin connector and two 20-pin connectors.
Before you do any of this, however, please make good diagrams so you can put things back the way you found them!
Circuit boards are held into the system with a single screw near the back of the PC. Remove the screw, and the board will come out. Rock the board gently back and forth to remove it from the system"
Drives in XT-class systems are generally held in place with screws that bolt the drives right into the chassis. AT-class systems typically have rails fastened to the sides of the hard drives; the drives slide right into the AT chassis like drawers into desks. Metal tabs hold the drives in place.
If you ordered a hard drive with an installation kit for AT-class machines, the installation kit probably consisted of the plastic drive rails and screws to mount them on the drive. Configuring the Drive
Next, you'll need to adjust two things on your hard drive: the terminator and the drive select jumper. If the drive is the only hard drive (floppies don't count), you don't need to mess with the terminator.
The drive select jumper gives a drive an address as far as the controller is concerned: either address 0 or address 1. Ordinarily, your first hard drive (let's call it drive C) is addressed 0, and the second, if the second hard drive D, and ignore for the present that it's possible for a single drive to own more than one drive letter.
The drive is addressed by placing a jumper-a tiny plastic box (usually black, but I've seen white and blue) over two metal pins.
Drives generally have pins for drive addresses 0 through 5, but we only use addresses 0 and 1 in the PC business. There are a set of pins to jumper for address 0, another set for address 1, and so on.
The address your drive responds to is determined by where you put the jumper. There are two examples of drive selectjumpers (and terminators, which we'll discuss presently) on "Hard Disk Drive Select Jumper." Just remember that the drive select jumper only goes on one address.
So we've said that the drive can have address 0 or 1. But which should it use? It depends on whether or not there's a twist in connect the hard disk to the hard disk controller-a wider 34-wire cable and a skinnier 20-wire cable. The 34-wire cable carries the control signals; the 20-wire cable the data signals.
Take a look at the 34-wire cable. It should have a 34-wire connection on one side that attaches to the controller and a 34-wire connection on the other side that attaches to the drive. Is there also another 34-wire connection in the middle of the cable? If so, that is intended to support a second hard drive.
If you have the middle connector, look between the middle connector and the hard drive connector on the end. Is there a twist in the cable? Some cables are cut, twisted, and reconnected between lines 24 and 29 on the 34-wire hard disk cables. Knowing whether your cable is twisted or not determines how you set the drive selectjumper.
If your cable isn't twisted, you set the drive select jumpers as I've already explained: Drive C is drive select 0, hand, if the cable has a cut and a twist, you set both drives to either drive select 0 or drive select 1, as you see in "Hard Disk Cabling." The Terminator
The last adjustment on the drive is the terminating resistor chip, or terminator.
You only need to mess with this if you're installing a second drive. The terminator is a group of resistors packaged in a chiplike housing. It will look like either a chip or half of a chip, and it can be any color, though it is generally not black so it will stand out from the rest of the board.
Limited space prevents a complete explanation of the terminator, but basically it's a resistor needed to complete a bus circuit. Drives connected to a controller are on a bus much like the bus that your PC hasthe slots on the PC motherboard. Something's got to hold up one end of the bus (termed an open collector bus), and that's The problem arises when the controller sees two drives with terminators-the circuit then ends up with half the resistance that it's designed for, and twice as much current runs through the controller and drive electronics. Result? You slowly cook the drive and controller.
So remove the terminator from the drive attached to the connector in the middle of the cable. Again, the arrangement is pictured in "Hard Disk Cabling." Look back to the figure "Hard Disk Drive Select Jumper," and you can see two examples of common hard drive terminators. Installing the Drive
Now the drive's configured. Let's physically install it in the chassis.
The easiest way to install a drive is to insert it partway into the chassis and then attach the ribbon cables.
Stop at this point; don't get overanxious to screw in the drive. The difference between a good installation and a bad installation (as students in my PC troubleshooting classes hear over and over again) is how the attached to the drive, take a minute and figure out where to put them. They go from the drive to the controller, but there's nearly always some slack. Sloppy installers just stuff the cables into the case and then slap the cover on. This is a time bomb. The next time you take the cover off the PC, you'll end up catching the cables on something sharp, and you'll rip them. So take a minute and see if you can tuck them down out of the way.
Don't forget to provide power to the drive with the power connector. That's the white plastic connector with four wires running back to the power supply. You'll see several of these four-wire power connectors. They're pretty universal, and they'll connect to a floppy drive, hard disk, or tape drive. It doesn't matter which one you connect to the drive-they're all equal. There isn't a special one for A and one for C, is handy. If they're all in use, you'll need a Y splitter to convert one of the power connectors into two power connectors. Contact your hard disk dealer to buy a Y connector, if necessary.
Now secure the drive. As we saw before, with most systems you either bolt the drive directly to the chassis or secure it with metal tabs that keep it from sliding out of the box. See "Securing Hard Drives" for details. Install the Hard Disk Controller
If the controller isn't already installed, put it in now. Installing the board is just the reverse of removing it; push the board's edge connector down into an expansion bus slot on the PC motherboard and then secure it with a screw on the board's back bracket.
A common question at this point is My PC has five (or eight or three) expansion slots. Does it matter which slot I put the board in? The answer is Basically, no. Some have a single edge connector.
Other boards are 16-bit boards. They have two edge connectors. A 16-bit board should go in a 16-bit slot, but an 8-bit board can go in either an 8-or a 16-bit slot.
Now hook up the cables from the hard drive. If you've got an AT system, the controller will probably be a combination floppy and hard disk controller, so be sure to hook up the cable for the floppy drives, too. Introduce the Controller and the Drive
Seems only polite, hmmm?
The controller needs to know what kind of drive it's dealing with. On XT-style systems you give it that information during the first part of the software installation-a step called low-level format, so we won't worry about that here.
On AT systems, the system BIOS has a table of drive types built into it. Most clones know of 47 different hard drives. Why 47? Who knows? The earliest IBM ATs only knew of 14 drive batch had 47 drive types. Cloners just copied IBM from that point on.
You just figure out which drive type most closely describes your hard disk-remember I told you to have heads, cylinders, number of sectors, and write precompensation handy?
For instance, I use a 60MB hard drive with 1024 cylinders, seven heads, 17 sectors per track, and no write precompensation. There isn't a drive type in my clone's ROM that matches that, but there's one that's close-977 cylinders, seven heads, 17 sectors per track, and no write precomp. That's drive type 18.
Once I figured that out, I ran my clone's SETUP program and told the system that I had drive type 18, and then I was ready to format the disk. I lost a little space, as I'm only using 977 of my 1024 cylinders, but that's not a big deal.
Well, that's how to do a hardware installation of most works as I've described, but this is the procedure for installing drives in most XT- and AT-class systems these days. Good luck and have fun-it's a great feeling to do a hard drive installation by yourself!
By Mark Minasi

Mark Minasi is an owner of Moulton, Minasi, &; Company, an Arlington, Virginia-based firm specializing in training technical and nontechnical users how to support, upgrade. and repair their PCs. He is also the author of COMPUTE'S recently published Maintaining, Upgrading, and Troubleshooting IBM PCs, Compatibles, and PS/2 Personal Computers. Some of the illustrations used in this feature were done by Terry Keaton, an associate with Moulton, Minasi, &; Company.
THE HARD DEMOGRAPHIC FACT THAT YOU WILL LIKELY SPEND MOST OF YOUR LIFE ON YOUR OWN IS RESHAPING SINGLEHOOD INTO A SATISFYING DESTINATION RATHER THAN AN ANXIETY-RIDDEN WAY STATION. WELCOME TO THE RICHLY DIVERSIFIED WORLD OF TODAY'S SINGLES. BY JILLIAN STRAUS * ILLUSTRATIONS BY JOHN UELAND // FOR 23 YEARS-HER WHOLE CAREER-BELLA DEPAULO built a stellar reputation as the go-to expert on the subject of deception, the lying and lie detecting we do in our everyday social life. She published dozens of papers, wrote scores of chapters and found a tenured professional home at the University of Virginia. At the same time, she was building a wide web of friendships, a vibrant intellectual life, traveling extensively and generally enjoying life as a single, unattached human being. Research psychologist that she is, she also began collecting data on attitudes about singles in America. Two years ago, she went out West on sabbatical. She liked it so much she chose to stay. Moreover, she was ready to put aside her work on deception for a while. "I decided to take a a full-time job," she reports. She signed on as a visiting professor at the University of California at Santa Barbara and teaches an occasional course. Sacrificing her status, following her passion and taking a huge personal and professional leap into the unknown- "I never could have considered that if I were part of a couple," says DePaulo. "Even now I'm not sure it will pay off. But in a marriage, I would have felt that I was not pulling my weight." DePaulo's own path exemplifies a seismic shift in the place of singles in American culture-in the lives they lead, in the way others see them and, more profoundly, in the way they see themselves. Not only are singles the fastest-growing population group in the country, most of us will spend more of our adult lives single than married. That hard demographic fact is rapidly turning singlehood into a satisfying destination rather than an anxiety-ridden way station, a sign of independence rather than a mark of shame than a demand to stuff all one's emotional eggs into one basket. "Singlehood is no longer a state to be overcome as soon as possible," says social historian Stephanie Coontz. "It has its own rewards. Marriage is not the gateway to adulthood anymore. For most people it's the dessert-desirable, but no longer the main course." People may still be eager to meet a long-term partner, but they are a lot less desperate, she adds. Increasingly, individuals are finding singlehood preferable to being in an unsatisfactory relationship. In fact, the possibility of singlehood as a viable life path throws into high relief a finding that is slowly emerging from mountains of social science data-that neither the coupled nor uncoupled life is an automatic ticket to bliss; much depends on the achievement of meaningful life goals and quality of the relationships you create. While polls show that men are warming to the idea of marriage, women are increasingly in a financial, emotional and professional position to weigh carefully all are more conscious of the tradeoffs-women still do more of the housework and childcare-they are increasingly unwilling, Coontz finds, "to put up with something that violates their sense of fairness." Married-couple households have dominated America's demographic landscape since the country's founding. In the 1950s, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, they comprised 80 percent of all households. But married couples make up only 50.7 percent of households today. Any moment now, 86 million single adults will define the new majority, some by design and some by default. While many are actively looking for Ms. or Mr. Right, most are also busy leading full lives, including having children. Today, unmarried Americans make up 42 percent of the workforce, 40 percent of home buyers, 35 percent of voters. There is even an official holiday dubbed "National Singles Week." HOLY "MATRIMANIA" DEPAULO BELIEVES THE growing number of singles is the hidden force behind what she calls "matrimania," "the glorification of marriage and, feel insecure about the place of marriage," she observes. "It no longer appears to be the only path to happiness." Even as singlehood is becoming the de facto norm, people who choose to go though life solo are deliberately kept in a state of confusion about their own motives by a culture that clings to the marriage standard. Typically, says DePaulo, singles are told that they are selfish for pursuing their own life goals. If you're single and you have a great job to which you devote energy, you're typically told your job won't love youback. Of course, singles are always suspect as tragic losers in the game of love. But most of all they are told through commercials, images and endless articles that they will never be truly happy and deeply fulfilled unless they are married. "The battlefield is now psychological," says DePaulo. Single women today have work opportunities, economic independence and reproductive freedom. "The things that can be legislated are all way to keep women in their place is to remind them that they are incomplete. Even if you think you're happy, the messages go, you don't know real happiness." There's a hunger out there for a new view of singles. Still, we've come a long way since the 19th century, when unmarried women were labeled spinsters or old maids and relegated to an inferior status. In the 1970s, a single Mary Tyler Moore bounced into America's heart with her professional ambition, dream of independence-and an endearing fauxfamily of coworkers and neighbors. Today television singles like Carrie Bradshaw lead such full, active lives that, like their real-life counterparts, they are sometimes ambivalent about marriage. As a 26-year-old account executive puts it, "I don't need a man in my life. I don't need or want a relationship because I am lacking anything. I want it only to add or enrich." Photograph // The notion that singles are uniformly lonely and miserable is a the psyche of singles themselves. There are countless singles living lives of "secret contentment," DePaulo insists. "They like their lives-they have friends, they travel and yet what they see and hear all around them is that you don't have a happy life unless you are matched up. I think it is hard for single people to fully recognize or say to other people 'I am happy. I like my life.' It is not even a part of our cultural imagination that you could embrace being single and want to be single." The reality today is that being single is manageable and brings freedom, says Ellen McGrath, a clinical psychologist who is president of Bridge Coaching Institute in New York. "It could be the better choice." By staying single, you may be more likely to develop into your best self, says DePaulo, whose book, Singled Out: How Singles Are Stereotyped, Stigmatized, and Ignored and Still Live Happily Ever After (St. Martin's) very emotionally empowered by pursuing what is meaningful to me, even if it is risky. When you are single, you have more opportunities to do what seems right to you without looking to another person for approval. "Many singles maybe so satisfied on their own that they claim they have no desire to look for a mate. In a recent survey by the Pew Research Center, 55 percent of 3,000 singles reported that they are not in a committed relationship and have no active interest in seeking a romantic partner. It is hard to know if these singles will someday want a special someone in their lives, or if they are hesitant to admit they want a partner or if indeed they are satisfied with being forever unpartnered; but being single today is no longer necessarily a default position, as most were socialized to believe. In her extensive counseling of single men and women, McGrath finds that a necessary first step for them to embrace their status is to reconfigure their own mindset. "Tradition tells There was a time when that might have been necessary for survival, but it is no longer the case. Singles must actively update their mental files to see that being unmarried is just as valuable a choice as being in a couple." Today, women especially have all they need to lead an independent life. There's no shame in having sex out of marriage. They can have sex without kids and kids without sex. They can be financially self-sufficient and purchase homes. Not very long ago, the "American dream" was all wound up in the marital ball. Banks, for example, happily accepted deposits from women but drew the line at lending them money for mortgages. Yet sociologist E. Kay Trimberger has found that having a real home is critical for the single psyche. "Owning your own home is a strong cultural value," says Trimberger, professor emeritus at Sonoma (California) State University, who followed 27 single women over a 10-year period. Home ownership makes singles feel independent New Single Woman. As one real estate agent puts it, "Single women are delaying marriage but not real estate." After married couples, they now make up the largest segment of home buyers-21 percent in 2005, up from 18 percent the year before. By contrast, single men make up 9 percent of home buyers, according to a recent survey by the National Association of Realtors. Forgoing marriage doesn't mean abandoning nesting: The concept of home profoundly matters to women, less as a place to do laundry, more as a sacred space for personal happiness. Just as important, it is a safe way to plan for the future. So many women are buying homes without waiting for Mr. Right that the building industry is adding design features specifically to appeal to them (secure courtyards, more street lights, extra closet space), offering maintenance services to make upkeep easy and-reversing decades of financial discriminationteaming with mortgage lenders to help women qualify for loans. Signing a check for hundreds of thousands of immediate return on investment: an immeasurable boost in sense of self-worth. Builders find it takes a lot less to satisfy single men: A flatscreen TV will often do it. "Men still see marriage as a way they settle down," observes Coontz. Women settle down on their own. In fact, they are often willing to go all the way and independently invest in parenthood if no suitable marriage partner appears. The psychological benefits of having a home are not limited to purchasers, says Trimburger, "Whether you rent or own, decorating and making a home helps you feel psychologically rooted." It's making a place that is not temporary. What's more, creating a home helps singles build relationships. Reina, a 37-year-old single woman, explains, "Once I invested time and money in my home, I saw my family and friends more often because I was excited to host dinner parties." WORK AND WORTH SATISFYING WORK is another component of a psychologically fulfilling life, and "If you love what you're doing, it gives you a sense of selfworth and autonomy. It makes you feel good about yourself that you are engaged in something important." Work has countless other benefits. A sense of identity is chief among them, particularly for singles. "In our society, we value work, self creation and autonomy," says the Sonoma sociologist. "Satisfying work provides a sense that you have achieved something worthwhile." Work also tends to supply important social networks, people of similar educational background and, often enough, values and interests. A single woman in her late thirties found herself much happier when she went back to work after time off: "I had a sense of purpose and a place to be. It gave me a reason to get out of bed in the morning and people to do things with in the evening." Although work may be just as rewarding for women as for men, women still can't always reap all the dedicated to their careers and spend lots of time at work are generally viewed very positively in the culture. But single women are sometimes seen as "compensating" for not having a spouse. "Women can be blamed for being too harddriving to be good in relationships," she notes. Men and women alike suggest that the main reason they are fulfilled as singles today is that they have lots of company. "Most of my friends are single. I have plenty of people to go out with, travel with and spend time with," says 29-year-old Tom. Sasha Cagan, author of Quirky alone: A Manifesto for Uncompromising Romantics, agrees. "There is an elevated importance of friendship for my generation. It has a vastly larger place in our lives because there isn't a wholesale rush to get married. You maintain a level of intimacy with many significant others. It makes singledom a lot more viable and satisfying." The soulmate culture insists that one person can satisfy all your emotional putting all of your money in one stock and hoping it's not Enron. Marriage today forces many people to put their friendships on the back burner. Singles, on the other hand, are free to develop deeper relationships with their friends without fear that they are betraying closeness. The flip side is that singles have to be more proactive about building their social lives; it takes an effort. "Single people are more likely to have a good relationship investment strategy. They tend to have a diversified portfolio of relationships-friends, siblings, colleagues-and to value a number of them," says DePaulo. "They have not invested their entire emotional capital in one person." Having a broad social network is physiologically as well as emotionally protective, although society perceives singles as psychologically vulnerable precisely because they lack the built-in support system of a spouse. BUILDING A BETTER SELF A BROAD ARRAY of friendships also appears to be a developmental plus. "Having a number of relationships allows you to develop different parts of Trimberger finds. Amongwomen, Coontz points out, this development is more a return to 19th-century patterns, before "heterosexual pressures made close same-sex friendships seem suspect and even deviant." Beyond friendships, a broad social network contributes a sense of community. Many singles without children feel the need to create connections to the next generation. "You feel valued as a single person when a younger person respects the life you have created," says Trimberger. Where are singles more likely to build their social networks? In 2006, the happy news is that it can happen almost anywhere. Some observers find that cities are easiest for unmarrieds to live in and form "urban tribes." Trimberger contends the suburbs are actually an ideal place to settle into life-single or married. Comprehensive sex studies show that married couples have more and better sex than singles, but the unattached may actually have more exciting sex lives. Psychologist McGrath finds that single men and women are often more sexually adventurous. "They get more variety and, they can cut their losses faster and leave when sex is not desirable." In interviews with single men and women, I found that singles almost unanimously viewed their sex lives as more excitingthan those of their married friends. "I don't think my married friends even have sex anymore," sighed Nick, a 30-year-old legal recruiter. DePaulo concurs. "It's erroneous to assume that just because someone has a permanent partner, his or her sexual needs are automatically being met. If you are single, you have to go out and find someone. But if you are in a serious relationship, you can still have issues with sex." More and more, that someone singles find is likely to be a friend. "They're not even looking for another person to be their everything," says DePaulo. Coontz agrees, citing broad new socialization patterns emerging in the culture, particularly a greater degree of nonromantic friendship across genders in which people are physically affectionate, though not necessarily sexual. "There has been lots of negative talk about casual sex for teenagers, who are emotionally immature," says Coontz. "But some casual sex is actually between friends-'friends with benefits/ in the parlance of the young-and that's probably healthy, especially among older individuals. Male-female relations don't have to be based on the excitement of insecurity." While it has disadvantages among the young, an increasingly casual attitude about sex enables older singles to disentangle their sexual needs from other needs, Coontz observes. "You don't have to talk yourself into falling in love to have sex." That frees people to more thoughtfully explore other passions and drives. "People accept a wide range of passions in life-from food to gardening to the need to feel competent-and they don't all reduce to sex." That may explain why middle-aged singles are especially likely to enjoy their solo status. What's more, there are more of them-28.6 percent of adults age 45 to 59 in 2003, versus 18.8 percent in 1980-and they interesting renaissance happens for people in their 50s," Trimberger explains. "There is more social support for settling into a single life." There are internal changes as well, DePaulo points out. "There is a perspective that comes with age. You may know the reality of coupling. You probably know other people who are living their lives rather than waiting for someone to transform theirs." So the next time your mother points to a table of five beautiful women dining out without dates and wonders why they're single, smile and tell her the truth: "Mom, they are having the time of their lives." And you can add that the tables have been turned. It's marriage, not singlehood, that's now the transitional state. Sidebar THE SOULMATE CULTURE SAYS THAT ONE PERSON CAN SATISFY ALL YOUR EMOTIONAL NEEDS. "But that's like putting all your money in one stock and hoping it's not Enron." Sidebar "MARRIAGE IS NOT THE GATEWAY TO ADULTHOOD but no longer the main course." Sidebar STRATEGIES FOR SINGLES Live Your Life to the Fullest, Now * Don't postpone home buying or other major endeavors. See your life as something to totally engage in rather than as marking time. * Travel now. It's liberating to immerse yourself in the experiences you want to have. * Pay attention to basic needs for meaningfulness and competence. Companionship is important, but it's not the only requisite of complete and satisfied adults. * Pursue your passions, whatever they may be. Stay Connected * Maintain contact with married friends. The soulmate ethic is no truer for them than for you-no one partner can satisfy all needs for companionship. * Establish ongoing contact with the next generation through meaningful activities. * Cultivate a broad array of friendships. Companionship comes in many forms. You don't have to pour all your energy into one person. * Use the Internet to find partners for activities you enjoy. * Remember that you're not the only they're the only ones comfortable with their solo status. "SEX BETWEEN FRIENDS MAY BE UNHEALTHY FOR TEENAGERS BUT NOT FOR OLDER INDIVIDUALS. Male-female relations don't have to be based on the excitement of insecurity." Sidebar "The notion that SINGLES ARE UNIFORMLY LONELY AND MISERABLE IS A MYTH that is dying hard-nowhere harder than in the psyche of singles themselves." Author Affiliation JILLIAN STRAUS is the author of Unhooked Generation: The Truth About Why We're Still Single. //
Section: THE WORLD AT WAR
What did Hirohito really think of Pearl Harbor? On the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack that brought the US into the Second World War, Herbert Bix offers a provocative reassessment of the Showa Emperor's responsibility for the conflict, drawing on his translations from diaries and memoirs of Hirohito and his court circle.
Since the death of the Showa Emperor Hirohito in January 1989, new historical documents have focused public attention on the leadership role that he and his innermost circle of advisers played in the Japanese political process both during and after the Second World War. These new materials, and others published over the course of the 1980s, furnish a fresh starting point for situating the Showa emperor in the history of the twentieth century. They help to delineate more clearly key elements of Emperor Hirohito's character, while exposing certain myths pertaining to his innocence in starting the Pacific War, and his heroism in ending it. They also raise questions about his position in the post-war state, where he was supposed to be a powerless.
The emperor's death lifted a taboo on discussing his role in history and in 1990 alone six' insider' diaries and memoirs of considerable historical value appeared. Two of them - the diaries of Makino Nobuaki, the emperor's Grand Chamberlain and Privy Seal from 1925 to 1935, and Nara Takeji, his chief military aide-de-camp - reveal the emperor during his first political crises in 1928 and 1931-33. They show his permissive attitude toward the military elite from the very start of its rise to power'. and also show that, with the exception of the Genro Saionji Kinmochi (whose influence relative to Makino declined after 1929), the emperor and his most important political advisers were never strong supporters of party cabinets.
The era of' Taisho democracy' (First World War to 1926) had coincided with the physical and mental inability of Hirohito's father to exercise his power under the Meiji Constitution. That situation, which had been public knowledge ever since the First World War, facilitated a making possible the rise of' Taisho democracy'. In 1926 when Emperor Hirohito ascended the throne and the' Showa era' began, a major concern among ruling circles was how to implant in the people the authority of Emperor Hirohito. It was, therefore, not entirely accidental that the period that witnessed the decline and end of the era of political party governments - 1928 to 1931 was also the period in which the young emperor and his close advisers, Makino Nobuaki, Suzuki Kantaro and Nara Taketsugu, were most preoccupied with reasserting the power and prestige of the throne, and establishing the' imperial will' as distinct from the policy of the government.
Sokkin nisshi, Kinoshita Michio, another diary revealing the emperor in the early post-war period, was kept by Kinoshita Michio, a Tokyo University Law School graduate, who in 1924 became Crown Prince Hirohito's private secretary and chamberlain. Kinoshita's record covers the period from his appointment as Vice Grand Chamberlain in October 1945 until his resignation in June the making of the post-war Japanese state, including the emperor's role in the emergence of a new' give and take' relationship with the United States. Here one finds the emperor's defence of his wartime prime minister Tojo Hideki's discussions of the emperor's thoughts on the designation and arrest of war criminal suspects, and entries dealing with the making of the emperor's famous' declaration of humanity', issued as an imperial rescript to the Japanese nation on January 1st, 1946.
According to Kinoshita seven people participated directly in the drafting process of the declaration, including the emperor. The Americans took the initiative and approved the original draft, believing that they were getting the emperor to participate directly in the debunking of emperor ideology. But Hirohito wanted to get across a different message: namely, that the monarchy had always been compatible with democracy. And his revisions ensured that the primary message of the rescript was not so much the disavowal of his alleged divinity but the idea that the democratisation the Five Article' Charter Oath' of the Meiji Restoration. In its reaffirmation of the past, and failure to explicitly repudiate the old wartime ideology of the divine origins of the imperial line, the' Declaration of Humanity' had some of the same mendacious qualities as the emperor's famous August 15th, 1945, surrender broadcast, which cast his acceptance of the Potsdam Proclamation in the form of a unilateral assertion of imperial will.
Kinoshita is also helpful in explaining how the emperor and his entourage prepared for the Tokyo war crimes trials, and how American policy makers in Tokyo and Washington assisted the Japanese' moderates' in transforming him from the symbol of Japanese militarism to the emblem of its new found pacifism. Kinoshita does not focus on the Japanese people who were the targets of this propaganda effort, but he was writing in that critical period when a gap had opened between the monarchy and the people, which tile court, with General Headquarters cooperation, was attempting to close by promoting a new emperor's periodic tours of local areas, which began in February 1946 and continued until 1954, were part of that effort. When historians examine Japan's road to war with the peoples of Asia and the West, they will not be able to ignore the issues of the emperor, the' palace groups' and the' emperor system'; nor will they be able any longer to treat the emperor in the post-war period as a completely non-political figure. The discovery of new historical materials have made it possible to put them all back into the picture. Doing this, however, will involve taking account of the emperor in his capacity as supreme military commander.
A recent Japanese language study of the Showa Emperor's war leadership, by Yamada Akira, gives new insight into the role of the emperor as commander-in-chief. In standard, authoritative historical accounts, such as Robert Butow's Japan's Decision to Surrender (1954) the wartime emperor is depicted as' a bystander watching with interest the turmoil no matter how personally concerned for the outcome he might be'. However, this' bystander' image of a constitutional monarch robotised and kept in the dark by the military, is a travesty. It is far more accurate to see Emperor Hirohito at the height of his political powers as an inconsistent wielder of sovereign power who did not want war with the United States and Britain but, by the late 1930s, moved squarely into the camp of the' renovationist' group who were tending toward an ever expanding war in Asia.
By October 1941, as Konoe Fumimaro and his chief cabinet secretary, Tomita Kenji, have suggested, a major factor in Prime Minister Konoe's resignation, which paved the way for the war cabinet of General Tojo Hideki, was the emperor's own increasing inclination toward war. Less than seven weeks after he had bestowed the mandate of prime minister on Army Minister Tojo, Emperor Hirohito sanctioned the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Thereafter, as the nation's supreme commander-in-chief entire war effort, even going so far as to insist that specific orders be issued to his commanders in the field, and, on occasion, interfering in military operations in all the far-flung theatres of the war.
Yamada documents eleven major instances where the emperor was deeply involved in supervising the actual conduct of war operations. According to the evidence in this work, Hirohito pressured the High Command to order an early attack on the Philippines, including the fortified Bataan peninsula. He pressed for, and secured, the deployment of army air power in the Guadalcanal campaign. Following Japan's withdrawal from Guadalcanal he demanded a new offensive in New Guinea, which was duly carried out. Unhappy with the navy's conduct of the war, he criticised the withdrawal from the central Solomon Islands and demanded naval battles against the Americans for the losses they had inflicted in the Aleutians. Finally, it was at his insistence that plans were drafted for the recapture of Saipan and, later, for an offensive in the excellent guide to a remarkable historical document, written around the time of Kinoshita Michio's diary but, like Kinoshita, not published until the great' emperor boom' of 1989-90. This document is the Showa emperor's dokuhakuroku or dictated account of the key events during his first twenty years as emperor. It was taken down in five dictation sessions in the spring of 1946, by close aides.
When the popular literary magazine Bungei Shunju conveniently published the dokuhakuroku in December 1990, it created a sensation by enabling readers to get a new and deeper insight into the emperor's character. For the first time since the war, many saw the forgotten fighting generalissimo side to Hirohito - a side that Yamada Akira and other Japanese historians had already documented on the basis of the emperor's' questions' to his military commanders, and their reports to him on the unfolding war situation.
The first point to consider about the dokuhakuroku, however, is the political intention behind its genesis. The emperor's 1928 to 1945 was composed in order to answer questions that had arisen specifically in connection with the Tokyo war crimes trial. The fear then was that the Americans might bring pressure on the emperor to abdicate, or even to testify as a witness in the forthcoming trials. The second point is that the published document is essentially a shortened version of an original that was copied out in pencil by the liaison officer of the Imperial Household, Terasaki Hidenari.
It has been conjectured by well-informed Japanese scholars such as Awaya Kentaro and Hata Ikuhiko, that Terasaki made an abbreviated English translation of the document and presented it to high officials within SCAP. Evidence in Terasaki's own diary as well as Kinoshita Michio's suggests that Terasaki probably acted with the approval of the Japanese foreign minister, Yoshida Shigeru.
Judging from the large number of copies that the Terasaki version of the dokuhakuroku has sold in Japan and the media attention it has gained, one may say that this single document has attracted more public attention than. Although many Japanese have commented favourably on the Showa emperor of the dokuhakuroku, many more, from all walks of life, have been shocked by the revelations: the amazing alibis by which he sought to exonerate himself for the defeat, his lack of consideration for the Japanese people, or guilt for the millions of victims of Japanese aggression.
The lack of moral fibre shown by his constant shifting onto others of his own ultimate responsibility for the defeat, and his failure to reflect on his own mistakes, have drawn the most critical comments. Readers have also raised questions about his dismissal of his first prime minister, Tanaka Giichi, in 1929, his decision to sanction the starting of the Pacific War in 194 1; and his role, three and a half years later, in Japan's decision to surrender unconditionally to the Allies.
For their part, professional historians have concentrated on the many myths about the emperor and his court advisers, or those whom US Ambassador Joseph Grew used to such myth is the notion that Emperor Hirohito was a normal constitutional monarch who, with a few well-publicised (and therefore undeniable) exceptions, never issued commands but merely expressed opinions or put his seal to documents. Another is that during the Pacific War he was a member of the peace camp, trying to surrender before the US began its all-out bombing campaign of the Japanese mainland. The dokuhakuroku has undermined the emperor's false renown as a constitutionalist and pacifist and raised questions about his incredibly belated decision to surrender in August 1945. In these and other ways, it has helped advance the whole debate on his unacknowledged war responsibility, even though much of what it contains is not new to historians.
The emperor of the dokuhakuroku combined a keen sense of himself as an absolute sovereign, with a remarkable capacity to pretend that he was a normal constitutional monarch. He was certainly a political realist with an appetite for the fruits of territorial aggrandisement, and that might have made him susceptible to the rhetoric of roof). When he observed in the dokuhakuroku that:
it does not matter much if an incident occurs in Manchuria because Manchuria is rural; but if something were to happen in the Tientsin-Peking area, Anglo-American intervention would surely worsen and might lead to a clash.
he seems to have been speaking true to character. In the Asian arena he could safely express his expansionist inclinations; and in China's north-eastern provinces in particular he easily rationalised the aggression of his armed forces. But when dealing with the West he preferred caution because he lacked confidence in Japan's ability to win a war against the United States and Britain, and was far more aware than his military commanders of Japan's vulnerability to economic blockade. Essentially, he believed in force but wanted to combine it with its opposite, diplomacy, so that Japan might retain the fruits of its aggression against weaker Asian neighbours.
Equally well-documented are the emperor's frequent disagreements with the military and his condemnations of their recklessness. These disagreements They stemmed from what the emperor imagined the United States or Britain would do in response to any particular act of Japanese aggrandisement. Although the military's rise to power in the 1930s created situations in which the emperor's orders were sometimes disobeyed, rifts between him and his military should not be exaggerated. Moreover, the military never had enough power to establish a dictatorship and could only operate through the authority of the emperor. As historian Yoshida Yutaka has observed, the military's rise to power during this period was also a process in which Emperor Hirohito strengthened his voice and projected his will in the policy making process.
Two other aspects of the emperor's worldview can be gathered from the dokuhakuroku. One was his sense of Japan as a' have-not' nation (vying with the Anglo-American powers who were intent on keeping it in a subordinate international position within the Washington treaty system). Another element appears to have been a low regard for party government at home. Needless to say, these too and both are exemplified in his defiant introduction to the dokuhakuroku. This particular monologue appears as a document attached to Kinoshita Michio's diary, written about the same time as the dokuhakuroku, but it is not reproduced in full in the published and abbreviated (Terasaki Hidenari) version. Here, addressing the origins of the Second World War, is what the emperor says:
Japan's call for racial equality, advocated by our representatives at the peace conference following World War I, was not approved by the Great Powers. Everywhere in the world discrimination between Yellow and White remained, as in the rejection of immigration to California and the Whites-only policy in Australia. These were sufficient grounds for the indignation of the Japanese people who suffered from having a small, overpopulated territory and a lack of raw materials, yet had considerable ability to develop.
Nor was that all. Despite my visit to England and the efforts I made for mutual friendship, the Anglo-Japanese alliance was abrogated immediately after my visit. As its armaments grew steadily stronger. We were forced to return Tsingtao.
In China anti-Japanese education, which drew on the sympathy of the Great Powers for the weaker party, had very deep roots. For these reasons Japan-China relations could only continue to worsen. Moreover, our political ability to deal with these unfavorable international conditions showed signs of gradual debilitation as a result of the corruption of the political parties. The feeling spread among the nation's masses that entrusting politics to the party politicians was endangering the future of the state. The selfless spirit of the nation cries out in such times of national crisis.
Because the military stood up under such circumstances, bearing the frustrations of the nation, it was extremely difficult to check the spirited young men who formed its core, even though they acted recklessly without regard to means. For their reckless behavior appeared to exhibit some common ground with the patriotic action of breaking the deadlock of the state.
Having rationalised Japan's war of aggression as a just, the emperor launches into a discussion of his first political crisis: the assassination, in June 1928, of the Manchurian warlord Chang Tso-lin by staff officers of his Kwantung Army, and his subsequent scolding (in effect, firing) of his prime minister, the Seiyukai party president, General Tanaka Giichi, for his alleged mishandling of the incident, His intention is to introduce at the outset his main defence: namely, that he was a' normal constitutional monarch', who ratified military fait accomplis but was unable to interfere in cabinet decisions.
If the dokuhakuroku raised many different aspects of the emperor's war responsibility, other new documents published in recent years have helped to carry that discussion into the post-Second World War period. On three different occasions the Showa emperor considered abdicating as a way of acknowledging his responsibility for Japan's war dead (as opposed to the Asian and Western victims of its aggression). The first was right after the surrender; the second was around the time of the Trial in November 1948; and the third was right after Japan signed the San Francisco Peace Treaty and regained its independence in 1951. Throughout that seven year period, the question of abdication was at once a war responsibility issue and an issue of protecting the imperial institution itself, on the ideological plane, from the dangerous idea of political accountability to which the emperor's prewar and wartime activites had exposed it.
In 1980 Tokyo University Press brought out the previously unpublished post-war diaries of Kido Koichi, covering the period December 15th, 1945, to the end of 1948, together with various Kido interviews, interrogations, memorandums and letters. Kido, who had been sentenced to life imprisonment as a' Class A' war criminal by the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal in November 1948, also gave thirty depositions to the Tribunal's International Prosecution Section between December 21st, 1945 and March 15th, 1946. And in 1987 this entire record was also published by the leading authority of the Tokyo Trials, Awaya Kentaro, finds new documentary evidence of Kido's strong feelings on the war responsibility issue and how he tried to get the emperor to act on the third and last occasion when he considered abdicating. Having served the emperor as Privy Seal and close confidant between June 1940 and November 1945, Kido knew what he was talking about when, from Sugamo prison on October 17th, 1951, he sent the emperor the following secret messege:
I had left the same word when I bid farewell to His Majesty December 1945. No matter how one looks at it, the Emperor bears responsibility for losing the war. Therefore, once you have thoroughly carried out the Potsdam Proclamation - in other words, when a peace treaty has been signed - I think it is most proper for you to take responsibility and abdicate for the sake of your imperial ancestors and for the nation .... By doing this, the bereaved families of those who died and were wounded in the war, those who were not repatriated and the families of the should make a very important contribution to national unity centered on the Imperial House. However, if you do not do this, then the end result will be that the Imperial Family alone will not have taken responsibility and an unclear mood will remain which, I fear, might leave an eternal scar.
Emperor Hirohito could never bring himself to abdicate. Nor could he adjust easily to the spirit of the new peace constitution which, although it stripped him of all political powers, had been largely established for his benefit. The conservative party politician and diplomatic historian Ashida Hitoshi served as foreign minister in the first socialist cabinet of Katayama Tetsu in 1947 and was prime minister in his own cabinet in 1948. His seven volume diary, published in 1986, has shed important light on the imperial institution during the entire occupation period. Ashida confirms the emperor's unabated (and unconstitutional) political activism and his inability to desist from interfering directly in domestic and foreign policy affairs. In an entry of July 22nd, 'align' with the United States in the Cold War with the Soviet Union and pressured him to continue the practice of making informal reports to the throne on diplomatic problems, even though such reports violated the new constitution.
By 1947 the Cold War had started to affect Japan, accelerating a reverse course in US occupation policy and creating new opportunities for the emperor to project his views into the policy-making process. As the international situation worsened, the emperor began to act more forcefully in the old mould, not only insisting that the government make unofficial reports to the throne (naiso), which it did, but secretly operating behind the scenes to ensure that the Ashida government cooperated with Washington against the Soviet Union. Ashida even records that on March 10th, 1948, the emperor importuned him to take action against the Japanese Communist Party, though any such action would have been illegal under the new constitution. By re-establishing the practice of naiso, and in other ways, Emperor Hirohito continued to act not.
Finally, new light has also been shed on the emperor's role in the establishment of the Shidehara Kijuro cabinet (October 1945 to April 1946), and how that cabinet colluded with MacArthur's GHQ to defend him on the issue of his responsibility for the defeat and for having indulged Japan's military cliques in their rise to power. Tsugita Daizabiro nikki, the short diary of Tsugita Daizaburo, chief cabinet secretary in the Shidehara government, brings alive the world of early post-surrender Japan with its millions of unemployed, demobilised soldiers, looming food shortages, mushrooming popular movements, and rising criticisms of those responsible for the great defeat. Tsugita wrote from the viewpoint of a professional bureaucrat and politician who believed in the twin myths of the Showa emperor as a constitutional monarchist and a pacifist who had brought the war to an end. The following diary entry of October 26th, 1945, suggests that from a very early point in the occupation General MacArthur was predisposed to exonerate the emperor of all war crimes.
Around 6 o'clock Army Lt. General Haraguchi Hatsutaro called on me. He said that he had met Brigadier General Bonner F. Fellers of MacArthur's headquarters and was told that the problem of the Emperor's responsibility for the attack on Pearl Harbor is the 'most important and critical' issue on the American side. The topic came up of how to deal with it. Both MacArthur and Fellers have very warm feelings toward His Majesty. Haraguchi has no doubt that they are thinking of how to solve this problem without causing trouble for the Emperor. However, American public opinion is very strong; there is also a proposal from the Soviet Union; and it seems that it is not so easy for MacArthur to do as he pleases. In any case, he said that we must have prepared and ready a general explanation i.e. defense for the Emperor. Regarding this matter, I think that since the Meiji Emperor, the Emperor of Japan has approved all matters reported to him by the Government or the veto. 'But at the time of the ending of the war, the Cabinet ministers and the staff officers of the Imperial Headquarters could not reach agreement. So, at the prime minister's request, the Emperor made a decision. One can say that this is almost the only instance in which the Emperor's will was reflected directly in government. I think it is most appropriate to explain this fact honestly.
Ten days earlier, on October 16th, 1945, Washington had instructed MacArthur to' proceed immediately to assemble all available evidence of Hirohito's participation in and responsibility for Japanese violations of international law'. From Tsugita's comments, it would seem that MacArthur responded to Washington's order by alerting the Shidehara cabinet to prepare a general defence of the emperor. Worried about how the United States would proceed on the issue of punishing war criminals, the Shidehara cabinet for the remainder of its existence worked closely with MacArthur's GHQ to protect the emperor from the Tokyo Tribunal. A statement it officials in answering questions' On matters of war responsibility' laid out the official line thereafter: all war responsibility (by which they meant responsibility for having lost the war) lay with the Government and the military High Command, while the emperor bore no responsibility whatever.
Meanwhile, MacArthur's efforts to solve the problem of the emperor's war responsibility without causing trouble for the Emperor' were neither entirely successful, nor salutary for the Japanese people. The very logic of the reforms entailed the smashing of emperor ideology by promoting a broad interpretation of war responsibility in all areas of Japanese national life. So, while MacArthur was attacking the social basis of the emperor system, extending the pursuit of war responsibility even to school teachers who had indoctrinated the Japanese nation with militarism and ultranationalism, he was also moving in the opposite direction where the emperor himself was concerned. By shielding the emperor from the scrutiny of the war crimes investigators, and later discouraging his abdication, MacArthur abetted the Japanese conservatives in preventing past aggression.
With the publication of the dokuhakuroku and other documents, the veil that was drawn over the Showa Emperor's war responsibility and his failure to abdicate has been pulled back. New debate on the role of the palace groups in the period of fascism and war has also been stimulated. The prevailing views in the West of the emperor as a pacifist standing outside the political process, and the palace' as a break on extremism throughout its prewar existence', have never corresponded to reality and are now sure to be revised in the light of the new material.
This will also bring the Japanese people back into the debate on war responsibility from which they were largely excluded during the occupation period. Since the death of Hirohito, a post-Cold War evolution has got underway in which issues of war responsibility and monarchy have once again become part of a necessary Japanese dialogue with the past. For historians, the danger in this debate is that because of documents like the dokuhakuroku, which focus process, we are apt to lose sight of the elusive prewar emperor system itself; and what it reveals about the deeper structures of Japanese state and society: its triangulation with power, class and cultural themes.
FOR FURTHER READING: Edited by Ito Takashi and Hirose Junko, Makino Nohuaki nikki. (Tokyo, Chuo Koronsha 1990); Sokkin nisshi, Koshita Michio (Tokyo, Bungei Shunju 1990); Yamada Akira, Showa tenno no senso shido (Tokyo, Showa Shuppan 1990). Kido Koichi, Kido Koichi nikki, Tokyo salban-ki (Tokyo, Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai 1980); Ashida Hitoshi, Ashida Hitoshi nikki, dai nikan. Edited by Shindo Eiichi (Tokyo, Iwanami Shoten 1986); Tsugita Daizaburo, Tsugita Daizaburo nikki (Tokyo, Sanyo Shimbunsha 1991); Fujiware Akira, et at, Tettei Kensho Showa tenno' dakuhakuroku' (Tokyo, Otsuki Shote, 1991); John W. Dover, Empire and Aftermath: Yoshida Shigeru and the Japanese Experience, 1878-1954 (Harvard University Press, Translated by Frank Baldwin (New York, Pantheon Books', 978); Nakamura Masanori, The Making of the Symbol Emperor System, Translated by Herbert P. Bix, Derek Bowen and Jonathan Baker-Bates (Forthcoming from M.E. Sharpe Inc. Publishers, Armonk, New York in 1992).
PHOTO: Old clothes or new clothes? The Showa Emperor in a pre-war photograph wearing ceremonial robes.
PHOTO:The revival of Samurai ideology among the young in the 1920s and 30s illustrated here, bore remarkable parallels with the development of the Hitler Youth. It recruited a generation that would profess unconditional obedience to the emperor as the symbol of militarism.
PHOTO: Japanese leaders arraigned at the International War Crimes Tribunal in Tokyo, May 1946; a fate that prompted Hirohito and his court circle to compose his dokuhakuroku.
PHOTO: Suzuki Kantaro - one of Hirohito's key advisers after his accession responsible for reasserting the' imperial will'.
PHOTO: The fateful gamble; the USS Helena (left) Harbor, December 7th, 1941. How much did Hirohito know - or approve of- the surprise attack which brought Japan into conflict with the US?
PHOTO: Konoe Fumimaro, Japan's last peacetime premier; it has been suggested that his resignation in October 1941 - and replacement by General Tojo - was spurred by die emperor's own decided bellicosity.
PHOTO:Noblesse oblige? Japanese war conduct has been sharply debated; it embraced the traditional death or glory code of the Samurai that was the inspiration for the group of Kamikaze pilots above, but also an ambivalence towards prisoners that could result in the horrific conditions of the Burma railway captured below by Ronald Searle.
PHOTO:Domesticated? This informal photograph of Hirohito and his wife underlines the cosy demythologised civilian role that Japan's post-war monarch was expected to play.
PHOTO:An eternal scar? Kido Koichi, Hirohito's keeper of the Privy Seal and close adviser - his memorandum urged the emperor to abdicate since he' bore responsibility for losing the war'.
board the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay, September 1945. Douglas MacArthur (left, at the microphone) was instrumental In persuading the US not to prosecute Hirohito as a war criminal but did his efforts to draw a veil over the emperor's role obstruct post-war Japan in an honest analysis of its imperial past?
By Herbert P. Bix

Herbert P. Bix is Associate in Research at the Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies at Harvard University and author of Peasant Protest in Japan 1590-1884 (Yale University Press, 1986). The extracts from the dokuhakuroku, quoted above have been translated by him for the purpose of this article.
Plant breeding is too much fun to be left to the professionals
EVERY GARDENER should be a plant breeder. Developing new vegetables doesn't require a specialized education, or a lot of land, or even a lot of time. It can be done on any scale. It's enjoyable. It's rewarding. You can get useful new cultivars much faster than you might suppose. And you can eat your mistakes.
There has never been a better time to get involved in amateur vegetable breeding. The seed-savers exchanges that have emerged during the last decade provide a rich source of raw materials for plant breeding. The smaller seed companies, many also founded recently, are eager to help perpetuate and distribute the creations of amateurs. And the professional plant breeders are all busy elsewhere. They are engaged, almost exclusively, in developing vegetables for commercial growers -- vegetables bred for uniformity and one-time picking so they can be harvested by machine, for tough skin and hard flesh so they aren't ruined by the machines, and for good storage and shipping are not necessarily the qualities home gardeners need; yet most of the new vegetables released annually with such fanfare are commercial cultivars.
Gardeners buy only small amounts of seed compared to commercial growers, so seed of cultivars that are best suited for gardeners is sold only in small amounts. Large seed companies often can't afford to carry it. No one can make a profit developing it, so no one is. If we gardeners want good new garden cultivars, we'll have to breed them ourselves. But this is as it should be. Gardeners have been developing their own cultivars for centuries. Besides, why should we let the professionals have all the fun?
This story is about how to breed your own vegetable cultivars and about three amateur breeders who have done it. None of them had any special education in genetics or plant breeding, yet each has produced good new garden cultivars -- cultivars that have been tested by a seed company, introduced or scheduled for introduction, and found worthy best developed by anybody anywhere.
GLENN DROWNS was only 16 years old when he started breeding plants, but he was al ready an experienced and enthusiastic gardener. It started when he was two and a half and his family planted some flower seeds. He was fascinated. By the age of four he was crawling through the fence to help his neighbor, who had a bigger garden. At eight he had a 500-square-foot garden of his own and was ordering his own seeds. By the age of 11 he was selling all the produce his family didn't need and using the money to buy seeds; by age 16 he was growing 50 cultivars of squash and 10 of cucumbers. He also tried about half a dozen of the shortest-season watermelons he could find.
More than anything else, Glenn wanted a ripe watermelon. His family lived in the extreme northern part of Idaho, where the growing season is short, cold, and unpredictable, and his melons wouldn't ripen. "I tried them inside little plastic tents all summer, just baked them. But I never got a ripe melon. The only fully ripe, melons I had ever tasted came from the store -- which didn't count."
Then he took high-school biology, and his class discussed crop improvement and hybridization. "Wow, maybe I could get a ripe melon that way," he thought. So he tried a cross. One of the parents was probably Sugar Baby'. The other was from a package of seeds some friends had given him labeled "watermelon." Glenn didn't keep much in the way of records; he thought he was just playing around.
Within four years, growing no more than a dozen plants per year, Glenn Drowns had developed a new stable cultivar -- one that reliably produces similar plants from seed to seed and year to year. Blacktail Mountain' will be introduced by Seeds Blum, located in Boise, Idaho, in 1991. It's a deep-green, to form a plant about 10 feet in diameter. The average melon is eight inches across, weighs eight to 10 pounds, and has a rind about half an inch thick. The flesh is orangish red, crisp, and sweet. The melons also have unexpected storage characteristics. If picked when not quite ripe and put in a cool place, they will keep six weeks and still taste as if they were just harvested. But what is essential about Blacktail Mountain' is that it's early -- as early as 65 days in the hot summers of Iowa, where Glenn now lives. "It's the earliest I've ever grown," he says, and at this point he's grown about 120 cultivars.
Glenn, now 27 and a high-school science teacher with a degree in biology, laughs when he describes the breeding program that led to Blacktail Mountain'. He didn't know there were books like Breeding Vegetable Crops and Hybridization of Crop Plants see "Further Reading," on out anything about how to do crosses. "So I just sort of guessed," he says.
Watermelons, like most cucurbits, have separate male and female flowers. Glenn noticed that some flowers had what looked like little fruits underneath and others didn't. He figured the flower buds with the fat bases must be females, the ones with skinny bases, males. He made his first cross exactly the way he does watermelon and squash crosses today, 11 years and thousands of hand-pollinations later. lie tapes the female flower bud shut with masking tape the evening before the bud opens for the first time. The timing is part convenience and part necessity. Late afternoon of the day before opening is also OK, but any earlier and the bud might still be growing fast enough to damage itself on the tape. The following day, Glenn plucks a freshly opened male flower from the appropriate plant, untapes the female flower, sprinkles pollen onto its stigma (at the top of the pistil) it. He doesn't ever untape it; it just shrivels at the end of the developing fruit.
Glenn crossed the putative Sugar Baby' with the unknown watermelon, then saved the seeds and planted them. The plants, he recalls, were similar to the Blacktail Mountain' of today. He self-pollinated each. "That was 1978," Glenn remembers, "a gruesome year." It was unusually cool, and his garden suffered deer damage. Only a few plants survived; he got just one ripe watermelon.
He planted the seeds from that melon in 1979. The plants looked pretty much the same. He self-pollinated each and got two or three ripe melons. He planted the seeds from those in 1980, but the vines were all frozen out on the fourth of August. Fortunately, Glenn had known better than to plant all his seed in one year. He replanted in 1981 and continued to inbreed-that is, to self-pollinate each plant. By about 1982 he was offering was already stable and was basically the same cultivar it is today. He grew it for a number of years more, however, before he felt confident enough in its stability to offer it to a seed company.
The development of Blacktail Mountain' was unusually easy. The plants of the first generation after Glenn's cross already had the characteristics he was looking for, and there was little variation thereafter. It's more common for the desired type to show up in a later generation. Glenn's development of Mexigold' squash is more typical. He started by crossing Mexican Banana', a blue-green banana squash, with the orange, heart-shaped Golden Delicious'.
Glenn usually grows just a few plants of the first generation after a cross because the plants tend to be similar. He plants as many of the second generation as he has room for, often 50 or more. Each second-generation plant is different from the others, each showing a different Combination of the characteristics of the original parents shapes of all hues, pinkish and bluish and orangish. He selected for pink hearts, each year self-pollinating the plants that produced pink hearts and eliminating the rest. After a number of years, all the plants produced pink, heart-shaped squash that weighed 10 to 12 pounds. Glenn had stabilized the strain -- had developed a new pure-breeding cultivar.
Part of the fun of breeding your own cultivars is the surprises. Glenn had selected for shape, color, and productivity, but Mexigold' turned out to be early as well -- earlier than Buttercup', one of the earliest of squashes. Seeds Blum plans to introduce Mexigold' in 1991,
EWALD ELIASON, age 73, is a retired Minnesota dairy farmer. He started breeding his own potatoes 17 years ago. "I've always enjoyed gardening," he says, "and potatoes are my favorite." He started by saving true seed from the potato plants in his garden. (The tuber pieces used as starts are called "" when they mean the product of sexual reproduction.) Fertilized potato flowers form berries that resemble small green tomatoes. Each contains about 200 seeds. Ewald picks the ripe berries, puts them in a blender with water and blends briefly. The seeds sink, the pulp floats. He plants the seeds in pots in a cold frame, then transplants the seedlings to his garden.
As Ewald's potato hobby grew, he accumulated more and more cultivars. When the Seed Savers Exchange started, he joined and obtained cultivars-including many heirlooms -- from fellow members. (An heirloom cultivar is one that has been handed down from generation to generation.) He received potatoes from friends. He visited Minnesota's North Shore Experiment Station one summer and obtained experimental material. His sister went to Finland and brought him back some true seed from European potatoes. And he started doing his own crosses.
Potatoes, unlike watermelons, have perfect flowers -- they contain both stamens (male) and pistils (female) potato flowers, but they self-pollinate to a significant extent. So when professional potato breeders do crosses, they remove the stamens before pollen is shed, a process called emasculation. Then they apply the pollen of the desired male parent to the stigma of the emasculated female parent.
Ewald, however, doesn't bother emasculating. He just takes a flower from the cultivar he wants as male parent and dusts its pollen onto the stigma of the flower of the other cultivar. Sometimes the offspring will be from his cross, sometimes they won't. "I just dust the pollen on there and take what I get," Ewald says. "Most of life is like that, I've found."
Just sprinkling pollen on there and taking what you get is a perfectly valid breeding method. When professionals do it, they call it a "fertile X fertile cross," which sounds much less cavalier. All it means is that the breeder thought the task of emasculating was not worth the flowers are so tiny that emasculating is difficult or even impossible. For practical breeding work, it's usually not necessary that all the offspring of an attempted cross really be hybrid, as long as enough of them are.
Potatoes are much easier to work with than squash or watermelons. For either of those, Glenn Drowns has to control pollination in order to develop or maintain a cultivar. Otherwise, bees would cross all his cultivars at random, and the seed would not breed true. Maintaining a dozen melon or squash cultivars entails hand-pollinating each cultivar each year. But since potatoes are propagated from tubers, not seed, all Ewald has to do to maintain a cultivar is plant its tubers. The resulting plants are genetically identical to the mother plant, whether insects cross-pollinate the flowers or not.
Ewald plants 50 to 100 seeds from each cross he does. Virtually all the plants give him hills of usable potatoes. During the growing season he evaluates the plants -- how vigorous they are he digs the potatoes and inspects them. He looks for potatoes that "grow clean" -- scab-free and blight-resistant. He makes notes about the yield, and during the winter he evaluates the potatoes for keeping and eating quality.
Ewald's favorite cultivar -- "so far," he says emphatically -- is Mesabi Gold', which Seeds Blum plans to introduce when enough seed tubers are available. It's a result of a cross of Minnesota #30' and Swedish Mandell', a yellow fingerling type (much longer than it is, wide). Mesabi Gold' has yellow skin,, yellow flesh, and good keeping and eating quality, Ewald says. Yield is good, too-about seven or eight full-size tubers per hill. The Plant itself is distinctive. Unlike most potatoes, it has upright stems about 30 inches high, though both parents had the standard bush form. "This is like a throwback to a tomato," Ewald jokes. "It's more a starch-type tomato., is a favorite of Jan Blum, co-owner of Seeds Blum." It's a beautiful potato," she says. "It has red skin and pink flesh and is a very nice producer. And it has lots of big flowers and looks just wonderful in the garden." She introduced the cultivar in 1989.
Blossom' came from a berry off a plant of Poorlander', an heirloom variety. Blossom' has good keeping and eating quality, says Ewald, and is a good yielder of potatoes "of more than ordinary size." But unlike most potato plants, which flower only on the ends of their stems, Blossom' also tends to flower at the nodes. Ewald thinks it could be used to breed an ornamental potato. "I'm thinking it has the potential of being developed into a plant you could grow in your flower garden," he says, "and at the same time, yoga could enjoy the potatoes."
Ewald Eliason is still various plants and dig them up, every one is a surprise," he says. "They're like children in a family. You just don't know what you're going to get."
TIM PETERS, like Glenn Drowns, became a plant breeder in high school. Glenn, however, had the good fortune to start with a vegetable that is easy to work with. Tim began with broccoli, a plant breeder's nightmare. And while Glenn seems to have been born a gardener, Tim had it thrust upon him.
At the age of 15, Tim was not particularly interested in gardening or in plants. He liked animals, and was learning how to breed fish. His father, though, was an avid gardener. Then the family moved from California to Myrtle Creek, Oregon, a small town in the foothills of the Cascade Mountains. The soil was poor. The insects were terrible. There was no rain. After a couple of years, Tim's It's your job."
Tim was not pleased. He wanted to spend his time with his fish. Instead he hauled manure, weeded, and watered things by hand. "Boy, I hated that," he recalls. "But after a while I decided that, since I was going to be stuck there in the garden all summer, I'd better learn to like it. And after a while I did start liking it some."
The following year Tim made his first cross, a self-pollination of Green Comet' broccoli. It was a disaster. He saved the seeds and planted them, but the plants hardly grew at all. Broccoli, like many of the brassicas, has a genetic incompatibility mechanism, a physiological mechanism that prevents self-pollination. The plants have perfect flowers and are anatomically capable of pollinating themselves. But the pollen doesn't usually fertilize well. In some cases, it won't germinate at all. In others, it germinates but grows so Even when self-pollen grows and achieves fertilization, seed may not develop or, if it develops, may produce only weak, sickly seedlings.
Tim didn't give up. He had read in a magazine that the Japanese practiced bud pollination of brassicas. He didn't know what bud pollination was, but it sounded like a good idea. So he started pollinating buds -- and it worked. Later he found out that the incompatibility characteristic of the stigma develops fairly late in brassica flower formation, so that by pollinating in the bud stage he was bypassing the incompatibility mechanism entirely.
Later in his breeding project, Tim needed to isolate broccoli plants to prevent cross-pollination. A professional would have had isolation farms, where each cultivar grew far from any other. Tim developed his own approach. He put the plants in pots and loaded them onto his bicycle. Then he rode around looking for isolated homes. When he found one, he knocked on the door with a potted broccoli in his hands, if they could help him out. Usually they did. Tim's early work with broccoli didn't lead to any new introductions, but he learned a lot about breeding plants.
After he graduated from high school, he got a plea for help from a friend in Africa, and off he went. He spent several years setting up a farm for a mission school and breeding tropical corn. He returned in 1980, during a mini depression in Oregon. There were no jobs. There was also no money for college. Tim got a part-time job doing landscaping and found a position as caretaker on a farm that gave him a trailer to live in and a four-acre field to breed vegetables in. Oregon State University, just a few hours north, had a fine agricultural library. "I'm going to learn everything I can from this field and that library," Tim resolved. And he did.
Tim now works with broccoli, cauliflower, tomatoes, corn, melons, and released commercially -- a broccoli, of course -- was introduced by Territorial Seed Company, located in Lorane, Oregon. Umpqua', named after a river in southwestern Oregon, is a very early, deep-green broccoli with especially large central heads. "In our trials," declares the Territorial catalog, "'Umpqua' has outperformed all other open-pollinated nonhybrid varieties that we know of." It's also earlier than all other open-pollinated cultivars and as early as the earliest hybrids. (An open-pollinated cultivar will come true from seed; a hybrid -- the offspring of a cross between two true-breeding cultivars -- will not.)
It took more than just inbreeding from a single cross, however, to produce Umpqua'. Like most plants with incompatibility mechanisms, broccoli exhibits strong inbreeding depression. This means that the more genetically uniform the plants, the smaller and weaker they tend to be and the lower their yield. Inbreeding, which is done in order to increase genetic uniformity, can thus be counterproductive. tries to achieve uniformity for the important agricultural characteristics while maintaining enough genetic heterogeneity to produce vigorous plants.
Tim started by crossing several hybrids with each other. Then he inbred the progeny from each cross to develop lines and selected the type he wanted -- very early broccoli with medium height, big central heads, and good yield -- within each line. Then he pooled all the lines and allowed them to cross-pollinate -- a mess, but a practical approach to dealing with the plant that had become his special priority. For several generations thereafter he selected for the type he wanted until his new open-pollinated cultivar became stable.
Tomatoes are one of Tim's other favorites. They are easy to work with. Because tomatoes are almost totally self-pollinating, you don't have to hand-pollinate to maintain a number of different cultivars or to inbreed from selected individuals. The plants inbreed themselves. They don't usually show inbreeding depression either. It's fairly easy to produce good inbred cultivars that perform as well or better lot of what he calls dehybridizing the hybrids. "The professional breeders have put lots of good things into those modern hybrids," Tim says. "I like those good things." So he tries to get them from the hybrids into open-pollinated cultivars. He might cross a very disease-resistant hybrid, for example, with an heirloom that has spectacular flavor, then inbreed and try to select a line that has the best characteristics of both parents.
Tim often starts just by saving seeds from a good hybrid. The seed company has already done the original cross between two different cultivars. Seed companies usually keep the identity of the parents secret so that no one else can produce the hybrid seeds. Customers often believe that they can't save hybrid seed, that it's no good. But you can save the seed from most hybrid vegetables.
The seeds from Tim's hybrid broccoli failed, not only because the parent was hybrid, but also because of their genetic incompatibility mechanism. The hybrid. The incompatibility mechanism prevented the plants from being self-fertile. Tomatoes, corn, squash, melons, cucumbers, and many other vegetables don't have incompatibility mechanisms. Seed from their hybrids is good; it just doesn't breed true. A row or field of plants that are all individuals could be a disaster for a commercial grower, but for the gardener it can represent opportunity.
For example, Tim has done a fair amount of work with the Early Girl Hybrid' tomato, which does well in the Pacific Northwest. It's very early, it's crack-resistant, it's resistant to verticillium wilt, and it has good flavor. But the fruits aren't very big. So Tim saved and planted the seeds from an Early Girl' fruit. All the resulting plants were pretty early, and all the tomatoes tasted good. But there was a tremendous range in fruit size, from almost cherry types to great big ones. He saved seeds from the plants with big tomatoes and has' but are open-pollinated and bear big beefsteak-type tomatoes as well.
Tim Peters had been an amateur vegetable breeder for more than a decade when he read that Territorial Seed Company was looking for a vegetable breeder. He could not imagine anything more wonderful than being paid to breed vegetables. But he had only a high-school diploma. Nevertheless, he screwed up his courage and went to talk with the people at Territorial -- and ended up losing his amateur status. He now handles the seed company's trial and breeding program.
GLENN DROWNS, Ewald Eliason, and Tim Peters all developed useful new vegetable cultivars -- ones that met their requirements better than anything else available. You can do it too. But where should you start? What kinds of things are worth doing? Are you likely to make any money at it? Should you patent your plant? And how do you get a new cultivar out where others can use it?
Many amateur breeders start by accident. They simply notice something start deliberately, choose a vegetable you like to eat; you could be eating lots of it before you're done. The amateurs profiled in this article suggest you limit yourself to one or two projects, although none of them did. You probably won't either, which is just as well. Not all projects work out.
Breeding new vegetables is a matter of love, not money. The U.S. Plant Variety Protection Act (1970) isn't of much relevance to those who develop or sell garden vegetables. Licensing a cultivar is too expensive -- $2,000 for 18 years. Few garden cultivars would ever sell well enough to cover that, so even those developed by seed companies are usually unprotected. Breeding them is not profitable -- which is one of the reasons that amateur efforts are so necessary.
While the Plant Variety Protection Act is of little benefit to amateur breeders, it's of little hindrance either. You can grow your own seed from protected cultivars as long as you don't cultivars in developing your own. You are not allowed to use a protected cultivar to make hybrids to sell commercially, nor may you merely select from a protected cultivar without doing any crosses. But you can cross a protected cultivar with something else and work with the progeny to develop your own cultivar. And you can use hybrids in any way you want. They are protected by secrecy, not by law.
Stokes Seeds, Inc., in Buffalo, New York, is a company that would like to see more from amateurs, says president John Gale. He has two suggestions, based on his own experience with amateurs. First, he says, an unstable cross straight out of the garden isn't useful. You have to grow a new cultivar for several years and cull out the off-types each generation. Only after the cultivar is yielding all desired-type plants is it ready to offer to a seed company.
Second, find out what is already available. There are tomatoes of most every, green, brown, purple, bronze, white. They aren't popular, but they're certainly not new.
Rose Marie Nichols McGee, of Nichols Garden Nursery, in Albany, Oregon, concurs and mentions that she is especially unenthusiastic about the idea of a "new" white carrot. "Carrots started white," she points out. "Breeders worked for a long time to get the beautiful orange color. Wild carrots are white, and any accidental cross with them gives you a white, so they turn up all the time. And anyway, we already carry white carrots."
But there are lots of things Rose Marie does want. There has never been much breeding work with herbs, she says. Almost anything that's different is interesting. Foliage differences; variegation; color differences in plants, flowers, or stems; differences in size, growing habit, or form; differences in flowering characteristics or patterns; differences in odor -- all are worth paying attention With vegetables Rose Marie is interested in early maturity, compactness, and disease resistance. If, for example, you have an eggplant that is doing nicely when all the rest are dying from verticillium wilt, you might have something. "The sophisticated amateur is well-positioned to notice these things," she says. "You may not know what the disease is, but you can see that one plant is behaving differently." (A cooperative-extension agent can help you identify the disease.)
"And with vegetables," Rose Marie says, "we look for quality, and also beauty. Many people are gardening on small plots, and the attractiveness of vegetables as plants is an increasingly important part of the pleasure.
"Genetic accidents occur all the rime," she says. "But what is important isn't just the plant. It's whether there is someone around to notice -- a person with a keen eye, with the ability to recognize what's special."
there is simply no professional breeding work. "Unless amateurs do it," she says, "it's not going to be done." She wants to know if anyone is interested in breeding Jerusalem artichokes (Helianthus tuberosa), for example, or groundnuts (Apios americana), or camases (Camassia species). "There are lots of varieties of camases," says Jan, "and the plants are beautiful, but few people have played around with them."
Amateurs can afford to gamble. They need not justify their efforts to superiors or grant agencies. Jerusalem artichokes, groundnuts, and camases aren't major vegetables now, but perhaps they could be if someone did the breeding work.
With common vegetables, what Jan cares about above all is flavor. She also loves vegetables that are grown for particular dishes. "If you cherish a tomato because it makes the very best lasagna, or whatever, that matters," she says.
Jan also has suggestions emphasizes that good things frequently come from accidents -- the spontaneous mutation, the accidental cross. "So many people will tell you about some wonderful thing that showed up in the garden one year. But they didn't save the seed from it. Sometimes I really ache when I hear about these things. You just know you're not going to see that again." Make records of anything unusual in your garden, Jan says. Save those seeds and grow some of them out next year.
Jan emphasizes that selection alone is a valid breeding method. People do crosses in order to achieve the genetic heterogeneity from which to select new types. But heirloom cultivars often contain a lot of genetic heterogeneity already. You can often guide them toward your own breeding goal by consistently culling out the plants you don't like each generation and saving seed from the ones you do like. "Everyone who saves seed is a plant breeder," Jan says. "They choose which genetic material to perpetuate, you'll want to get it out where others can find it. The simplest way is probably to offer it through a regional or national seed-savers exchange. The Heirloom Gardener, by Carolyn Jabs, lists regional and crop-specific exchanges. See "Further Reading," on page 48. Abundant Life Seed Foundation, in Port Townsend, Washington, for example, is both a seed company and a nonprofit foundation dedicated to preserving the germplasm of the Pacific Northwest. It handles native, naturalized, and open-pollinated cultivars. Forest Shomer, the director, says the foundation would like to carry amateur-bred cultivars that do well in the Northwest.
The Seed Savers Exchange, in Decorah, Iowa, preserves and distributes open-pollinated cultivars that are not available commercially. It is fertile ground for amateur vegetable breeders, and a marvelous source of breeding material, contacts, and information. The Exchange's Garden Seed Inventory and Winter Yearbook describe all cultivars available commercially or through members. You can see what has been accomplished in the like the cultivar you're thinking of. In addition, members often list their projects and interests, exchange information, and test each other's cultivars.
You may want to offer your new cultivar directly to a seed company. Many of the smaller or family-owned seed companies are happy to introduce vegetables bred by amateurs. Choose just one seed company to approach, however. Testing and introducing a new cultivar is work, and the introducing company has no legal protection. If a new introduction is successful, many companies will offer it. The introducing company receives no reward for its work other than the satisfaction of being first to offer something special.
By the time you've developed a good new cultivar, you'll often know which seed company to offer it to. Look first to the companies you buy seed from. If you like what they're doing, they might like what you've done too. Territorial Seed Company was the logical choice for Tim Peters's new broccoli. It is well in the maritime Northwest, and has introduced many new brassica cultivars. Glenn Drowns and Ewald Eliason both met Jan Blum, of Seeds Blum, through the Seed Savers Exchange. Her company specializes in open-pollinated and heirloom cultivars. Many of the newer or smaller seed companies were founded specifically to serve home gardeners. Among them any good new garden cultivar is likely to find a home.
A CENTURY AGO, seed catalogs were full of new introductions bred by amateurs. Today such contributions are rare. Yet there are not very many professional vegetable breeders, and their work is focused on just a few of the most economically important vegetables. Fortunately, some commercial cultivars are good garden cultivars as well. Also, many professionals deliberately spin off garden cultivars from their commercial breeding programs. And sometimes they spend part of their time working on cultivars just for us, whether it is economically justifiable or not. Most are gardeners themselves, or at least started out that way.
Before about 1900, there plant breeding in the sense we'd use the phrase today. During the first half of the century, as the basics of genetics came to be understood, commercial vegetable production was still largely a scaled-up version of garden production, and most vegetables were sold near the farms where they were grown. Commercial cultivars were often similar or identical to home garden ones. This Was a golden age for development of garden cultivars. Professional breeders, with their new-found knowledge of genetics, created much of the best we gardeners have today. By 1950, however, most commercial vegetable production had become machine-oriented. The needs of commercial growers and home gardeners diverged. Since then, the contributions of professional breeders to gardening have dwindled.
Unfortunately, amateur vegetable breeding has also dwindled. It became almost a lost art during the decades when the professionals were so active. Now the professionals have largely left the field, and there is a vacuum. It's time for amateurs to move back in and fill the gap. into your garden and make a cross. You don't have to know what you're doing. You don't have to do it right. You don't have to read a bunch of things first. You might do everything wrong and end up with something wonderful anyway. The important thing is to start.
Breeding plants is something every gardener did once. It's something every gardener should do again. Developing your own vegetables can add a new dimension to your experience as a gardener and to your satisfaction.
For the addresses of seed companies and seed-savers exchanges mentioned in this article, see page 59.
PHOTOS (COLOR): Left: Flanked by shelves of neatly labeled jars at the Seed Savers Exchange, in Decorah, Iowa, squash breeder Glenn Drowns removes seeds from a Queensland Blue'. Next in line are African White Boer' and Delicata'. Opposite: A flock of geese examines other heirloom winter squashes that Drowns grows and uses for breeding stock.
PHOTOS potatoes was enough to inspire Ewald Eliason to try a little plant breeding. The basket shown here holds Santa Rosa Red', Peru Purple Finger', German Finger', warm-yellow Rosa', and the spotted Siberian'. Below: Broccoli selection requires a fairly discerning eye, as Tim Peters has discovered.
By Carol Deppe

Carol Deppe is a geneticist and writer in western Oregon. She is currently working on a book about vegetable breeding for amateurs. This is her first article for Horticulture.
FURTHER READING
No books have been written specifically for the amateur plant breeder. Yet there is a wealth of information available, and much of what has been written for professional breeders is usable by amateurs. The trick is simply not to let yourself be intimidated. It helps to skim as many different books as possible. Some authors will explain certain words and concepts, and others will explain others. You can pick up most of the basics that way, even when no introductory material expensive and are available only in the biggest libraries or in the libraries of universities with agriculture schools. However, all the books listed here, except for the annual Winter Yearbook of the Seed Savers Exchange, are readily available through interlibrary loan. The first four books are intended for the layperson. The next three are specialized books for professional breeders or their technicians, who often have no background in the subject. The last three are theoretical books on plant breeding and plant genetics. Happy reading!
The Garden Seed Inventory, 2nd edition, by Kent Whealy (Seed Savers Exchange, 1988). A compilation of names, descriptions, and sources for all nonhybrid vegetable cultivars available commercially in the United States and Canada (more than 5,000). As much fun as 215 seed catalogs, which is what it represents.
1990 Winter Yearbook, by Kent Whealy (Seed Savers Exchange, 1990). A list of cultivar descriptions; gives access to thousands of cultivars maintained by members but not available the Seed Savers Exchange.
Seed Savers Exchange: The First Ten Years, edited by Kent Whealy and Arllys Adelmann (Seed Savers Exchange, 1986). A compendium of the best articles published by the Seed Savers Exchange in its 10-year history. Includes the Seed Saving Guide, which is as good as any whole book published on the subject.
The Heirloom Gardener, by Carolyn Jabs (Sierra Club Books, 1984). An introduction to finding and growing heirloom cultivars and saving seed. Includes an appendix giving the addresses of the various seed-savers exchanges.
Hybridization of Crop Plants, edited by Walter R. Fehr and Henry H. Hadley (American Society of Agronomy and Crop Science Society of America, 1980). Instruction on exactly how to make crosses. Many pictures and diagrams. No background in genetics or plant breeding is required. Crops covered are bean, broadbean, chickpea, corn, cowpea, crambe, lentil, pea, peanut, potato, rapeseed and mustard, soybean, sugarbeet, and forage crops. Doesn't cover genetics or general plant breeding.
Breeding Vegetable Crops, edited by Mark J. Bassett (AVI Publishing, 1986). Fourteen chapters covering 14 vegetables: asparagus, bean, cabbage, carrot, corn (sweet), cucumber, lettuce, onion, pea, pepper, squash, sweet potato, tomato, and watermelon. Each chapter includes sections on the general botany of the vegetable floral botany and controlled pollination (doing or avoiding crosses), major breeding achievements of the past, an overview of current breeding goals, genetics, gene lists, and an extensive bibliography of the current professional literature. If your vegetable love is one of the 14, this book is a must. It assumes an extensive background in genetics and plant breeding, but much of the book is useful for novices too.
Vegetable Seed Production, by Raymond A. T. George (John Wiley and Sons, 1986). For the professional seed producer. However, researchers frequently need to gives small-scale as well as large-scale methods. Covers virtually all major and most minor crops. Includes information on pollination mechanisms and isolation requirements of the plants and on harvesting, threshing, and storing of the seed.
Plant Breeding and Genetics in Horticulture, by C. North (Macmillan, 1979). An introduction to genetics for beginning horticulture students and interested others. A good place to start if you'd like to learn some of the genetics behind plant breeding.
Flower and Vegetable Plant Breeding, by Leslie Watts (Grower Books, 1980). A more extensive introduction than North's to the genetics behind plant breeding. For beginning horticulture students and "enthusiastic amateur gardeners." Besides general plant genetics, it includes a page or two of specific information on most of the major vegetable groups. It has a short glossary.
Fundamentals of Plant Genetics and Breeding, by James R. Welsh (Kreiger Publishing, 1981). For beginning plant-breeding students. More comprehensive coverage of both basic genetics and but no coverage of specific vegetables. It has a glossary.
By Carol Deppe
HOW MUCH SPACE DO YOU NEED?
You can conduct an elaborate vegetable breeding project with ridiculously little land. For example, Tim Peters recommends the following procedure for tomatoes: Plant about 50 seeds of your first generation in a half-gallon pot of soil. When they come up, select for early emergence and seedling vigor, and eliminate all but about 10. As the plants grow, remove all suckers and branches, and limit each plant to just one vine. In addition, you may need to leaf-prune -- that is, remove all the older, bigger leaves to keep the plants from shading each other out. When the plants start flowering and have set a few fruits, remove the tops. Then continue to remove all suckers and branches. And pay careful attention to soil fertility. Use good soil initially and fertilize as necessary.
The plants will be stunted compared with field-grown ones, flowering will be they will ripen. You can determine fruit colors and shapes. You can tell whether the plants are determinate (shorter, bush types) or indeterminate (continual-bearing vine types). You can tell earliness relative to other plants similarly grown. And you can select for disease resistance. For the latter, just shred some infected plant material on top of the soil in the pot.
During the second year of your breeding project, plant 50 seeds from each of your original 10 plants in separate half-gallon pots. You thin, grow, prune, and evaluate as before. This time, save seeds from just one plant per pot, because you're going to use only 10 pots per year. In subsequent years, you always choose just one plant per pot from which to continue inbreeding. In this way, you can inbreed 10 different lines out of a cross with just five gallons of soil.
You can use this method with peppers also, Tim says, and with some of the, or with vine crops. For melons, squash, and cucumbers, plant the seeds in a bed, just six inches apart in all directions. Then proceed as for tomatoes. You'll be able to select for fruit color and shape, earliness, disease resistance, and many other characteristics -- but not, of course, for fruit size or yield.
By Carol Deppe
Enriched "Elder" The moving tribute to the Scripture scholar Raymond E. Brown, S.S., (8/29) was masterly. Its brevity, understandably, left some facets of Ray's career unmentioned. I note only four from experience. 1) Ray was an effective preacher of the word-clear, insightful, pastoral. Witness his homilies at St. Mary's Church in Baltimore, and at Corpus Christi Church near Union Theological Seminary in New York City. His addresses on how to preach using the liturgical cycle (Advent, for example) were priceless. 2) Ray was frequently harassed, picketed, calumniated by ultraconservative adversaries. Apropos of his treatment of the infancy narratives, one syndicated Catholic columnist asked if it was farfetched to suggest that Brown and his kind might be harboring "a death wish against the Child." Still, never a harsh response, however deep the hurt. 3) Ray rarely if ever took something away from Catholics without putting something better in its place. One example: Dealing with Catholic fears of theological and catechetical disaster if we admitted asked: Is it any more divine to say that Jesus instituted each sacrament than to hold that the church instituted at least some through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit? 4) Ray's contributions, using New Testament evidence, to our deeper understanding of Catholic priesthood (priest as disciple, apostle, presbyter and presider at Eucharist) continue to enrich the lives of many of us "elders." Walter J. Burghardt, S.J. Woodstock Theological Center Washington, D.C. Superb Scholar Thank you for honoring the late Father Raymond Brown on your cover and for the fine tribute to a superb biblical scholar by Daniel J. Harrington, S.J. (8/29). I feel a personal loss in his death. In 1966, when, enthusiastic about implementing the directives of the Second Vatican Council, I embarked on establishing the Trinity College Biblical Institute in Burlington, I turned to Father Brown who was most helpful. Although he could not come as a lecturer that year, he immediately committed himself to our second institute in 1967. and encouragement. His personal participation a half-dozen times enabled us to bring the best of biblical scholarship to the grass roots level, the very reason for the existence of our institute. Miriam Ward, R.S.M. Trinity College Burlington, Vt. Courage and Wisdom Kathleen A. Cahalan's remembrance of Bernard Haring, C.S.R., "Still Spiritually Alive" (8/15) was a fine tribute to our departed confrere. How ironic that her eulogy found itself in an issue whose lead articles treat the evils of tobacco, since HIring himself had been a smoker and suffered from the resulting cancer of the throat-to the point of having lost his voice, but only literally until now. I wonder what my brother Redemptorist would think of the recent crackdown on bishops' conferences (reported in the same issue). The gradual alienation of theologians from the conversation, any conversation, but especially from matters pastoral and moral, is akin to rendering the body of Christ blind or worse, voiceless. Who will pick up from where Haring church which seems to be more interested in determining eligibility for true membership than in reaching out to the lost? Who will muster the courage and wisdom to keep teachers pastoral, to regard with awe the complexity of the human person, to remind us once again that our mission is not to moral perfectionism but rather to being free and faithful in Christ!? Daniel Francis, C.Ss.R. Redemptorist Missions Bronx, N. Y. Communal Responsibility The two articles by John McCain and Joseph Califano Jr. (8/15) on the matter of tobacco manipulations hit the nail on the head as to who and what. The missing background that so silently abrogates positive actions on the tobacco issue and other equally deadly socially accepted ways to kill yourself is our society, which minimizes personal and communal responsibility and discipline, leaving all outcomes to whoever seeks gain for self. Raymond F. Zambito, D.D.S. Locust Valley, N. Y. Acrid Toxic Substance To live in south Georgia for several years is to become increasingly aware of living in a pandemic concluding the tobacco harvest, after which they will move north to work in Kentucky. In reading Mr. Califano's statistics, I wonder if the annual figure of 450,000 includes those who have worked directly in the cultivation and harvesting of this crop? For such an apparently benign plant, which matures to a nearly lime-green color and sprouts delicate pistils by early July, is acrid to the touch. We distribute brochures advising farm workers to wear long-sleeved shirts whenever they work with tobacco. When work begins at 4:00 A.M. to beat the heat that reaches 90 degrees by 9:00 A.M., these advisories are quickly forgotten, and clumps are grasped to the bare chest. The pesticides are particularly toxic during a summer of drought. We can count on taking farm workers with symptoms of nausea to the clinics during June and July. Two young people recently developed urinary tract infections, as their kidneys could not process the toxins accumulated in their bodies during the first few weeks of the harvest. Juana and Roberto needed medical attention because liberally used with tobacco. What will become of their fathers, mothers, aunts and uncles, who have developed such a tolerance yet carry the toxins within? Marc Fallon, CS.C. Adel, Ga. Clean and Crisp I was pleased to see that you are moving into the age of computers. May I encourage you in this venture? I hope that you continue into the world of the Internet. Also, I wanted to compliment your use of Tim Foley's art (cover, 8/15). It is clean, crisp and message-packed. Keep up the good work. Lantz Powell Louisville, Ky. Tender Feelings How is it possible that a Presbyterian's reflections on the Assumption of Mary (8/15), in the wink of an eye, could bond me to Mary-and, in a way, with more tender feelings for her than I experienced even back in the sweet days of the "May altar." "Bring flowers of the rarest, bring flowers of the fairest" to Mary to this poor human being, Mary. The Presbyterian and Mary have shown me this fascinating "new" face of the Creator! He is bedazzled by the prosaic. Vincent Blake, O.P. Albuquerque, N.M. Discretion and Balance Am I right in thinking that reflective Christians must be tired of having to read again and again and again that the church is (and ought to be) countercultural? Does such a one-sided position proceed from a thoughtful theology or from an ill-conceived ideology? St. Paul gives a far more balanced picture. He certainly does not spare his words about the "ungodliness and wickedness" (Rom. 1:18) that be found in the GrecoRoman culture; yet he tells the Philippians that "whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just... you must consider" (Phil. 4:8). In truth, throughout its history the church has never embraced or rejected a culture in its totality but sought to exercise prudent judgement and to take what would blend well with the evangelical message some of the church's decisions turned out to have been misguided. Wisdom is in discretion, not in sweeping indictments. We believe (doctrine of the Catholic Church) that human nature is essentially good; hence it will produce good fruits in any culture. We believe also that there are evil inclinations in human hearts (Catholic doctrine, too); hence cultures must be probed and pruned before they are received and sanctified in the earthly kingdom of God. Blessed be the teachers who teach us discretion! Besides, would not the church look silly without culture? Ladislas Orsy, S.J. Georgetown University Law Center Washington, D.C. LETTERS should be as brief as possible and sent with the writer's name, address and daytime phone number to AMERICA'S editorial offices or by electronic mail to: letters@americapress.org. Letters may be edited for length and clarity.
LAST JULY OMNI JOINED A FLOTILLA OF SUN WORSHIPPERS ON A VOYAGE INTO THE TWILIGHT ZONE
7:27 A.M., July 7, 1991. We're ninety-six hours from the eclipse, but some of the dedicated eclipse tans are already out on the starboard railings of the S.S. Independence, squinting anxiously at the sun. It's good and bright, right this minute. That's pretty much the way you'd expect the sun to be here in these sunny Hawaiian waters, and the good news is that if the moon were going to slide in front of it today instead of four days from now you'd surely say that it was being eclipsed, all right. The bad news is that you wouldn't be able to make out some of the fainter outer corona because there's a thin, high fan of cirrus that starts at the horizon and spreads out over the eastern sky. It won't keep you from getting a sunburn, but it's just enough to fuzz out the fainter patches of coronal light. Maybe our luck will be better on. Pacific skies are cloudy. I've flown over this ocean twice in the last few weeks, fourteen and a half hours from San Francisco to Hong Kong, and there was never a minute when I could look out my window and see no clouds in the sky at all. This morning there are fluffy little clumps of cumulus all over the eastern horizon. Twenty minutes later, while we're eating our breakfast papaya and omelets on the fantail, a couple of clumps slide right over the sun, and that's the kind of thing that can really spoil an eclipse for you.
Of course, on the Independence we'll be a moving target. We should be able to dodge a few cumulus shadows. We'd better do it, too. There are 800 passengers who have booked passage on the Independence for the sole and simple reason that they want to see the sun go out. If they don't see it with their own eyes some of them are going to be thirsting 800 more on its sister ship, the Constitution, heaven knows how many others aiming to be out at sea somewhere in Hawaiian waters, on anything from a kayak to a catamaran, so they can get a good look at the Nineties' best eclipse.
The great thing about the July 11, 1991, eclipse isn't just that it's a good long one (more than four minutes of totality right here; some other eclipses give you only seconds) but that its path sweeps right over a lot of places where people like to go anyway. Once it leaves the Big Island its next stop on land is the tourist havens along the Mexican coast; so Baja California is standing room only, too. Other eclipses have been in far less desirable (or, for that matter, accessible) places. The sun and moon don't consult human wishes when they meet. The moon's shadow can strike the earth anywhere on its sunlit (or, of course, temporarily nonsunlit) has a distressing habit of doing so in the middle of an ocean, jungle, or iberian wasteland; when scientists wanted to check out Albert Einstein's relativity predictions by observing the May 29, 1919, eclipse they had to go to an island in Africa's Gulf of Guinea to do it.
Still, some of our shipmates n the Independence might do e same thing. Some of them have seen three, five, as many as a dozen total eclipses in one part of the world or another, anywhere from New York's Central Park (that was way back in 1925; I saw ost of that one myself) to the na Sea, and they all want more. They come in all shapes and sizes, our shipmates do. Over the week we're at sea I meet an Army chaplain, an advertising executive, a bundle of teachers at all levels, retired senior citizens from assorted walks of life, and-unusual for a cruise ship, but not really unexpected for this mathematicians, biologists, chemists, computer people, and one or two who don't exactly say what it is they're working on, but whose home base is one or another research facility of the Department of Defense.
Then there are the kids. There are dozens of them. We happen to have lunch one day with a bright, well-mannered seven-year-old named Michael, traveling with his grandparents and doing his best to be good company... but clearly yearning to get it over with so he can get back to his Nintendo. The adults have other entertainment: movies, hula lessons, cards, contests, cabaret shows, and "us" -astronaut Michael Collins, photographer George Keene, meteorologist Joe Rao, and generalist (which is to say, science-fiction writer) me. This will be Keene's eleventh eclipse, and he has spectacular photographs of the last five to prove it. Joe Rao is the weatherman who will try to pick out the clearest piece of ocean for us on the morning photographed several eclipses himself, while Mike Collins, on his way around the moon on Apollo 11 in 1969, saw all the personal eclipses a person might want. I am low man on this particular totem pole. All I have is the memory of that ancient 1925 event-and now Joe Rao breaks the news to me that I was several miles too far south and east at the time to see real totality, so that all I actually got was about a 99.99 percent partial. I never knew that. I was five years old. All I knew was that the sun went out.
We sail after sunset. When it's full dark and we're well away from the light pollution of Honolulu and Waikiki, Joe Rao takes a bunch of us out on deck to look at the constellations. Captain L. Richard Haugh has turned off all the lights the rules of the sea will allow, and the seeing is good.
This is a good place to see the southern constellations, and you want to take pictures. They were originally built as Atlantic liners, with glamorous histories, until the Hawaiian-American Line rebuilt them to cruise the islands. They're steady photographic platforms because their propulsion is gentle steam rather than the sometimes jittery diesel motors.
7:28 A.M., July 8. We're tied up at the port of Nawiliwili, Kauai, and if the eclipse were this morning we'd be in pretty good shape. The high cirrus veil is gone, and although there are some hefty cumuli around, we shouldn't have much trouble dodging them.
There's one unwelcome development. The trade winds blow steadily from the east at these latitudes, but for the last few days they've been taking some time off. Now, in the absence of the trades, dust from the erupting volcano in the Philippines has backtracked to our air. Besides burying Clark Field, Mount Pinatubo is making a faint, almost invisible, silvery sheen over the sky. Its dust has made some gorgeous, and it's for the best possible view of the total eclipse that we've collectively traveled all these miles,
Mauna Loa isn't the Big Island's only towering mountain. The other is Mauna Kea, just a trifle taller and crowned with astronomical observatories.
That's one of the other graces of this July 1991 eclipse: Its path of totality goes smack over one of the world's largest aggregations of big telescopes, on the peak of Mauna Kea. The reason so many institutions have put their biggest instruments there isn't because the astronomers like sunbathing on the beaches-actually, much of the programming for the telescopes is done by remote control from as far away as the Greenwich Observatory in Englandbut because the seeing is so good. At two and a half miles up, the mirrors are placed well above much of the earth's air and most of its obscuring water vapor-most of the time.
Still, I know from personal experience that even up there the seeing sometimes goes sour. Mount Palomar to the Bigger Dish of the radio telescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico-and once when I was staying in Hilo I couldn't resist the temptation to take a look. Against advice I rented a four-wheel-drive vehicle and made the climb. The advice had been good. It wasn't a fun drive: narrow road snaking up the mountain, high winds that made the Jeepster slither back and forth on the loose gravel, with 500-foot drops and no guardrails, and a freezing, sleety tempest at the top. There wasn't going to be any seeing that day. Not even sight-seeing; I turned right around and headed back down-and was lucky, I guess, because the next day the road washed out in the storm and a party of astronomers was stuck on the mountain for three days.
And they're not doing much better now. The peak of Mauna Kea has been socked in for three days, and the solar astronomers are biting their nails. They really want to get this one. Sooner or later there will be another total eclipse passing over their heads, but, on average, they come back to the same place only once every 350 years.
The Mauna Kea astronomers don't really need a total eclipse to study, for instance, the sun's corona. They do it all year round. They make their own eclipses, when they want them, by sliding a sun-sized opaque disc into the optics of their telescopes, and with the bright solar disc hidden the corona pops right out. But then sunglow lights the air around the image, and besides, the chance of comparing the natural eclipse with the coronagraph studies lets them check their simulation, and anyway they certainly want to see it. They've been setting up for this once-inseveral-lifetimes photo opportunity on Mauna Kea for a long time, and the clouds that are now hovering around the top of the mountain have never been more unwelcome.
On deck a passenger asks me if we're going to see Baily because I happen to know the answer to that one: "No."
Baily's Beads are the little necklace of bright points of light that you sometimes see around the eclipsed sun at totality. They come from the mountains on the rim of the moon; at an exact matchup the valleys between them let light from the sun's rim through.
But we won't see them this trip, because on this eclipse the moon is a tad too large; it will overlap the disc of the sun and thus cut off not only Baily's Beads but a little of the inner corona, and the reasons for that are that the moon happens to be about as close to us (at 222,380 miles) as it ever gets, and also simply that it's July.
The season of the year matters. The earth's orbit around the sun isn't a perfect circle; it's stretched out a little to become an ellipse, and the sun isn't exactly at the Northern Hemisphere is that when it's our winter we're at the part of the orbit that's closer to the sun, and now in July we're the farthest from it-94,552,000 miles or so instead of the average distance of around 93,000,000. This makes our Northern seasons a little milder than those south of the equator, but it also makes the sun relatively a little smaller for this summer eclipse. Thus there will be the moon's overlapand no beads.
Carried away with this success, I go on to demonstrate some eclipse-viewing techniques. The ship's owners have passed out cards containing patches of totally exposed photographic film to look through, which is one first-rate way to do it. The patches are about as nearly totally opaque as you can get-if you hold them over a light bulb, the bulb is invisible-but through them the sun is nicely visible, looking like a tiny orange hanging in space.
There are other ways of seeing the sun without risking your optic nerve, too, and, which sometimes gets up to as many as four. I show them how to make a pinhole in a stiff sheet of paper and hold it over a white surface; the pinhole becomes a lens and the image on the surface is a perfect tiny replica of the sun. A larger image can be made by using binoculars or a small telescope-not looking through it, of course, because that's a rapid way to achieve blindness, but letting the light from the eyepiece fall on a surface. Or you can simply use a mirror to reflect an image on a wall.
It's worth looking at even before the eclipse, because this is an active period for the sun just now-many flares, many sunspots. With the naked eye I can't see any sunspots on any of our images, but through a 30-power telescope I find two big ones close together and a speckling of tinier ones, like grains of black pepper on a melon. With all this activity there should be some fine Keene gives a slide talk on the planets of the solar system and some of the more glamorous other telescopic objects. The cruise director has scheduled the talk for the ship's 125-seat theater, yet there are 200 or 300 other passengers milling around who want to get in and can't.
The thing is, the people on the Independence are not your usual passengers. Some of them are normal enough to just want the usual sea, sun, and shopping, and for them the eclipse is just a nice little added attraction, but the overwhelming majority are a different breed. They are among those lucky few who have discovered what a grand spectator sport science is. I understand them well, for I am of their blood. Like them, I try to chase science wherever I go, from marveling at fossils captured in the polished marble lobby of a Manhattan skyscraper to 2,200-year-old irrigation projects in China. I have found people like these among the geysers of Iceland and in Africa's Rift Valley lectures. Even if it means missing the ukulele lessons.
7:28 A.M., July 9. We steamed all night, and this morning we're anchored off the Kona coast of the Big Island. If the eclipse were right now we might squeak by-the sun's there, all right, but it isn't perfect. It's dimmed by some clouds over the mountain.
Of course, on the eleventh we won't be this close to any mountains. We'll be anything up to 50 miles offshore, but when I look off to where we'll be on the western horizon what I see is a pretty discouragingly thick cloud bank. Forty-eight hours from now that one will be long gone... but what will take its place? We're not that far from the Intertropical Convergence Zone-the latitudes that sailing-ship masters used to call the doldrums-which is the place where the light and fickle winds go in all directions and can pop up a disturbance on short notice. So weather forecasting in these meteorological reports with Joe Rao.
In their talks Keene and Rao are covering the skies and the weather, so when I do my first lecture I talk about the geology of the Hawaiian islands. They're definitely volcanic, but they're also situated a long way from the "ring of fire" around the Pacific Ocean, where colliding tectonic plates produce Mexico's Paricutin and Washington State's Mount St. Helens and all the others, up through Alaska and down through Kamchatka and Japan. Hawaii sits right in the middle of the biggest tectonic plate of all, where you don't expect volcanoes to be. Yet the islands are nothing but a long string of volcanoes, the newest one, the Big Island, to the south and east of the island arc; the others growing older as they stretch off to the north and west, past Kauai, as far as the eroded surface atolis and underwater seamounts that end the chain.
What made them? A "hot spot," a a little hotter and more buoyant than the stuff around it, and so it pushed its way up through the rock to make a volcano. As that volcano grew, it became an island. But then the Pacific plate, slowly moving northeast, pulled that first volcano away from the hot spot, and another began in its place. And so on while the older ones, their renewing lava flows having dried up, began to be slowly eroded by the wind, rain, and waves.
The Independence is going to spend most of the day in the port of Hilo on the Big Island of Hawaii. The newest island, it still has the active volcanoes of Mauna Loa and Kilauea. I urge all the science chasers in the audience to take the 40-minute drive up to spectacular Volcanoes National Park so they can see the craters.
The other lecturers have been talking about the exploration of space-particularly Mike Collins, who has been there. Curiously, there's a connection between the lava tubes lava tube is formed when the lava spilling out of an overflowing crater or vent rolls down a hill; the lava moves in the form of fingers, like chocolate syrup dripping down the sides of a sundae, and the outer surface of each finger begins to cool almost at once. After a while the outer surface hardens, forming a sort of pipe that contains the molten rock pouring through its interior. When the source pool of lava dries up, the lava inside spills out. The hollow tube remains, though it is covered by later flows.
The moon once had volcanoes, too, and they probably produced their own lava tubes. If so, they're probably still there and reasonably intact-there's not much erosion on the surface of the moon to break them up as it would on Earth-and because of the light lunar gravity they're probably much bigger than Kilauea's, as much as 1,000 feet in diameter and miles long.
So there's a bit of good luck for any a safe place to live underground, away from the danger of radiation from solar flares. If they could find a convenient lava tube they could save a lot of excavation: dig down to the tube, slap a coat of sealant on the walls, fill it with air (probably imported from Earth).
All that, of course, contains several maybes-of which the biggest is that, maybe, we will sooner or later go back to the moon, this time to stay.
Around midnight we all get an unadvertised bonus, namely a chance to see some serious volcanism in action.
We don't have to chase this science very far. All we have to do is look over the rail, because the Independence is rounding the southern shores of the Big Island, and that's where Madam Pele has been spilling her lava into the sea for the last few years. Villages have been buried, tropical forests set afire, and still the flow oozes down.
From the ruddy lights along the slope of the mountain. At a distance they look like the campfires. They aren't. They're what volcanologists call "skylights." As the lava tubes cocoon their red-hot contents on their way downhill, the tubes sometimes crack and bright sludge peeps out. And then, when they reach the beaches and the surf, the streams explode into clouds of steam, brightly lit from the fiery lava, shooting off rockets of red-hot rock in all directions. You can see this fountaining firework display 20 miles away. There are three of these steam infernos working now, and as we get closer we can hear them, too: hissing and spattering, occasionally a distant gunshot sound. In a lifetime that has given me chances of close-up inspections of a number of volcanoes, I have never seen anything like it.
That's not quite all. There's another marvel nearby, though we can't actually see it.
That one is the next Hawaiian island, already nine miles offshore, or just about under our keel at one point, and no more than 5,000 feet away-but unfortunately, those 5,000 feet are all water, straight down. Its name is Loihi. It will be a while before this young volcano's lava flows lift it above the surface, but then Loihi will be another island, and Hawaiians of that date will have to add a ninth bar to their state flag-about a million years from now.
7:28 A.M., July 10. Sun up, sun glorious; if the eclipse were today instead of tomorrow we'd have it in the bank.
Half an hour later, though, it's not so glorious. The clouds move in, a drizzle starts, before long it's pelting rain and if there's a sun in the sky there is no way for anyone on this ship to find it. But hey, what did you expect? We're docked in the harbor of Hilo.
Hilo is sited on the wet winds get lifted up and cooled off, causing them to drop out all their accumulated burden of moisture before going on to the (usually) dry Kona coast on the west. What that moisture does is fall as rain on the umbrellas of the people of Hilo-200 inches of it in an average year. It makes for wondrously lush tropical forests and gardens-but don't forget that umbrella.
At midnight we're under weigh to the off shore point where we hope to see the sun go out, and Joe Rao is pacing the deck. We're already a long way from Hilo, but the clouds have followed us. The best he can count is three stars, and those only for minutes at a time. It's worry time on the Independence. He spent an hour at the weather station at Lyman Field in Hilo, and the best the maps and the forecasters could offer was a fingers-crossed "maybe."
But there's nothing to be done about it now, and we.
7:28 A.M., July 11. This is it... and we lucked out! It's gorgeous, it's happening, and it's clearly in sight!
We're at latitude 19' 30' 42 "North and longitude 156' 32' 54" West, 33 and a bit miles off the Kona coast. Clouds are all around us. The Intertropical Convergence Zone has done its number around us, and high cirrus and cirrostratus, mixed with Philippine volcano dust, are coming at us from one direction, while low, thick island clouds are heading toward us from another. But we're in the clear! There's a doughnut of clouds above, but the captain has put us in the hole of the doughnut, and we can clearly see the sun catch up with the moon and touch.
When the first tiny bite appears at the top of the sun there's a cheer from all concerned. The bite gets bigger... and bigger... disc of the sun is gone and the streamers of the corona leap out at us.
We have totality.
There's another cheer at that, of course. That's what this trip is all about, and it's worth everything it cost. At the top of the sun there's a spot of ruby-laser light, where one immense red prominence ten times the size of the earth has leaped out and coiled back on itself to fall back to the sun's surface. A bit later another bright prominence shows up at the bottom of the sun's disc-fortunate places for them to be, because if they'd been on the sides of the sun (that is to say, actually its north or south poles, bearing in mind our right-angle view from the earth's surface) they would have been hidden by the enlarged lunar disc and we might have seen no prominences at all.
Now we all know why we came here. Photographs don't do it. Photographs can't of all, photographs don't show the wide, dark sky surrounding the fantastic eclipsed sun. If I'd seen it without previous knowledge I'd certainly have taken it for a UFO, a Disneyland special effect, or a miracle; in fact, what it is is wonderful. Next to me an elderly man is weeping with joy, and most of the rest of us are close.
We have four minutes and some seconds of fine, clear, unobstructed totality, and it passes in the wink of an eye.
When we get around to remembering the rest of the world we find out that Baja did as well as we did, but almost all the thousands onshore on the island of Hawaii itself were socked in. About the only ones in the area other than ourselves who saw true totality were the handful of astronomers on top of Mauna Kea. They were above the clouds. There was a touch of ice fog at the surface, but the eclipse was clear.
, Michael, the seven-year-old who had mourned his absence from his Nintendo, turned to his grandfather and said, "Now I have something to tell my grandchildren."
"What grandchildren?" his grandfather asked. "You've been telling us you were never going to get married."
"That was then," Michael said. "Now I've changed my mind."
By FREDERIK POHL
Section: A FIELD
Carrots for the energy industry: That's the core of George Bush's advice this summer as legislators in both houses of Congress try to concoct a national energy policy. Leasing the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for oil and gas development is essential, Bush says; so is increased production of natural gas and nuclear power. Energy efficiency? For Bush, it's a topic hardly worth mentioning.
Free-market principles are said to be an integral part of Bush's energy creed. But he's a pragmatist at heart, shedding his laissez-faire mantle when pushing for subsidies to the energy industry, and donning it again when confronted with talk of new regulations, taxes, and import fees. "Too heavy-handed," he declares these traditional policy tools.
In his National Energy Strategy released in late February, Bush showcased a long list of industry-friendly measures that he said would ensure a "secure, efficient, and environmentally sound" energy future. This latter claim spurred Richard Heede and Robert Bishop to fire up their computers. The's premier energy-efficiency think tank, rigorously examined one key section of Bush's National Energy Strategy -- its controversial oil provisions. Their aim was to get beyond the document's promises and ideology by comparing it with an alternative energy policy based on efficiency. They gave Bush's high oil-production goals a reality check, and then compared both plane' prow able effects on the cost, consumption, and import of oil over the next 20 years.
Did the researchers conclude that the Bush strategy would make our energy future more secure, as advertised? "For some people it will," they say, "but only if they happen to run oil companies." -- the editors THE EFFICIENCY SCENARIO
In preparing an alternative oil policy fired by efficiency gains rather than by drilling in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge, we first examined the transportation sector, which consumes about two-thirds of the oil used in the United States. We assumed that, on average, new automobiles would increase their fuel economy by 2 miles by 2000 and 65 mpg by 2010 -- a conservative goal that can be met with existing, cost-effective technology. We posited that the efficiency of other forms of transportation -- planes, buses, trucks, and so forth -- would improve at the same rate, a goal also achievable with technology that is now readily available.
Our strategy ignored belt-tightening options: We assumed that no cutbacks would be required either in the number of cars or in the miles that we drive them. Instead, we figured that these factors would increase at the present rate.
Finally, we assumed that the amount of oil put to other uses -- 33 percent goes for home heating, industrial boilers, asphalt, and petrochemicals -- would decline at 5 percent a year, as it did for much of the 1980s due to efficiency gains.
Figure 1 shows: (A) the nation's existing extraction rate, which is declining by 4 percent a year; (B) how little that extraction rate would be move that President Bush has called central to the nation's energy security); and (C) the National Energy Strategy's projection -- more precisely, its quantified hope -- that increased subsidies to the oil industry could boost that rate by 20 percent, from 8.8 to 10.6 million barrels a day by 2010.
Why do the administration's oil-rich dreams seem so unlikely to come true? The United States is the most densely drilled petroleum region in the world. Its oil-extraction rate has been gradually declining since 1985. More than half of the country's 13 largest oil fields are four-fifths depleted. Delivering new supplies, whether by squeezing more oil from old wells or by finding and developing new ones, is becoming increasingly difficult -- even with subsidies.
Given these realities, we find the National Energy Strategy's extraction goals geologically and economically improbable. By 2000 the country would be paying $185 billion a year for oil under Bush's plan -- almost twice as much as it pays today. By 2010 efficiency the cornerstone of our energy policy would send the curve in the other direction, offering savings instead of rapidly escalating costs. Neither curve includes environmental or security costs, both factors that would be far smaller in an energy-efficient economy.
"We know how to run the present U. S. economy on one-fifth the oil we are now using," says energy expert and Rocky Mountain Institute founder Amory Lovins. The efficiency improvements Lovins is talking about would cut demand at a cost of about $5 per barrel of oil saved. The oil that Bush would wrest from Alaska would run three to seven times more per barrel, not even considering the devastation of the Arctic Wildlife Refuge.
Our efficiency proposals offer compound benefits: Not only would we need less oil to do our work, what we did need would be cheaper.
Energy-efficiency gains made since 1973 are now saving the nation $100 billion per year. As Figure 2 shows, we could enjoy an even bigger financial reward in the future if we Because Bush's scheme misses key opportunities for meeting our energy needs more efficiently -- by raising auto fuel-economy standards, for instance -- oil consumption would rise as shown in red. Our efficiency scenario, on the other hand, could reduce oil consumption significantly over the next ten years and keep demand level in the decade after that.
People who have doubts about whether substantially greater auto efficiency is possible should consider Volvo's prototype LCP 2000. It seats four comfortably, is more crashworthy than federal standards require, accelerates faster than the average car today (from 0 to 60 in 11 seconds), and gets 81 highway miles to the gallon. To top it off, Volvo has devised a streamlined manufacturing process that would make the LCP 2000 no more costly than typical Volvos today.
Other models on the automakers' drawing boards are similarly impressive: the General Motors TPC gets 61 mpg in the city and 74 on the highway; the Renault Vesta 2, 78 in the city and 107 on the to name but a few encouraging examples. Manufacturers are hesitant to market these fuel-efficient models, however, because U. S. consumers have little incentive to buy them; gas is too cheap.
There's no shortage of innovative thinking among the world's auto designers -- just a failure by industry and government to put such thinking to work. As oil analyst Rob Watson of the Natural Resources Defense Council points out, "The right place to look for the biggest energy reserve is not the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, the Outer Continental Shelf, or Saudi Arabia. It's time to drill in Detroit." After having gone to war at least partly to protect its oil interests in the Persian Gulf, the United States might well be expected to make reducing imports one of its highest priorities. Yet the National Energy Strategy (shown in red) does nothing to reduce the national appetite for oil -- it merely suggests subsidizing domestic producers and using alternative fuels. Because these measures can't keep up with unbridled Putting cost-effective energy efficiency measures to work, on the other hand, would reduce imports from almost 8 million barrels a day in 1991 to 6 million barrels a day in the year 2000 (shown in purple). Along with this decrease in imports would come a welcome increase in national security.
PHOTO (COLOR): AN ENVIRONMENTALIST'S GUIDE TO THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION OIL POLICY
PHOTO (COLOR): Bush's National Energy Strategy (NES) can't deliver on its biggest promise: to reverse a steady decline in domestic oil production.
PHOTO (COLOR): If the NES were edopted; the nation's energy bill would skyrocket.
PHOTO (COLOR): By ignoring waste, the NES would help increase our consumption of oil.
PHOTO (COLOR): The NES would make us increasingly dependent on oil from the Persian Gulf.
GRAPH: Figure 1. OIL EXTRACTION
GRAPH: Figure 2. OIL COSTS
GRAPH: Figure 3. OIL USE
GRAPH and Robert Bishop
The subject of an appropriately shape-shifting exhibition seen in Paris, Washington and now New York, Dada was the 20th century's most all-inclusive and far-reaching art movement, rejecting nothing, no matter how vulgar, provocative or insincere. Today's art is, in many ways, its product. Photograph Preview of the First International Dada Fair, Berlin, June 1920; left to right: Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Hock (seated), Otto Burchad, Johannes Baader, Weiland Herzfelde, Margarets Herzfelde, Dr. Oz (Otto Schmalhausen), George Grosz and John Heartfield. Heartfleld and Rudolf Schlichter's Prussian Archangel hangs from ceiling. Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz/Art Resource, New York. Photograph Preview of the First International Dada Fair, Berlin, June 1920; left to right: Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Hoch (seated), Otto Burchad, Johannes Baader, Wetland Herzfelde, Margarete Herzfelde, Dr. Oz (Otto Schmalhausen), George Grosz and John Hearffield. Heartfield and Rudolf Schlichter's Prussian Archangel hangs from ceiling. Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz/Art Resource, New York. // Less than order again falling to ruin, the seven-year-old Museum of Modern Art in New York opened "Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism." including the first-ever institutional survey of the unruly Dada movement. Obliged as a matter of conscience to decry and satirize the arrogant social, commercial, military and political regimes with anything to gain from World War I, the Dada artists, along with their works, were targeted in the'' 3Os as "degenerate" by Fascist ideologues usurping ever more power. Reuniting some of the works from the historic 1936 MOMA exhibition, or replicas of them, as in the dizzying case of Marcel Duchamp's motorized Rotary Glass Plates (1920/1979), this past February the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., was home to the exhibition "Dada," with over 400 stingingly tragicomic items, many no less provocative today than when they were first made. Images of wheels were abundant, mostly disengaged wheels incapable of getting anywhere, none more dramatic than Duchamp's striped plates great exhibition, with its informative, lavishly illustrated catalogue, coincides with the publication of Exquisite Dada: A Comprehensive Bibliography, edited by Jrgen Schfer, the 10th and final volume of a sweeping study of the chronologically brief (1915-1923) movement, edited since 1979 by Stephen C. Foster and given the overall title of Crisis and the Arts: The History of Dada.1 In irregular Dada fashion, both Exquisite Dada and "Dada" were seemingly planned to mark, of all things, the 89th or 90th anniversary of the 20th century's most all-inclusive and far-reaching art movement, predicated on a notion of "art" taken as broadly as possible, whatever the means and mode of expression. Nothing was excluded, no matter how amateur, vulgar, insincere or ephemeral-the edgier and funnier the better. Dada was theatrical, with a slapstick emphasis on anticlimax; it was omni-critical, meta-ironic, politically subversive, morally freewheeling, poetically prosaic. "Someone steps on your toes. It's Dada," explained the 1921). Organized in conjunction with the Centre Pompidou in Paris, where from Oct. 5, 2005 to Jan. 9, 2006, well more than twice as many items were on display as were shown in Washington, this remarkable exhibition will finally be presented at MOMA, beginning on June 18. Like Surrealism, the most immediate of its many ongoing legacies to modern culture, Dada was at least as much about literature as about the plastic arts, and while both the National Gallery and the Centre Pompidou presentations included empty rooms where visitors could listen to recordings of the greatest Dada sound poetry by Jean Arp, Hugo Ball, Raoul Hausmann, Richard Huelsenbeck and Kurt Schwitters, the French version of the show additionally incorporated an antic profusion of printed matter and autograph notes. "The substance of Dada turns out to be the creation of hundreds of paper documents exchanged on a roughly daily basis during the dozen years of the movement's existence," explains Pompidou curator Laurent Le Bon in the encyclopedia-style French version of the with sections on artists at work outside the key Dada centers, from Brussels to Tokyo.2 As installed at the Centre Pompidou (a floor plan is included in the catalogue), the exhibition was divided into nearly 50 separate rooms, some devoted to centers like Zurich and New York, others to individual artists, events, publications or art genres. This mazelike installation concept resulted in considerable redundancy, and even a cursory inspection took days. But for fanatics it was sublime. For example, the multifaceted approach was endorsed during "Dada in Debate," a two-day symposium held at London's Tate Modern last November in response to the concurrent exhibition at the Pompidou. Organized by David Hopkins (University of Glasglow) and Michael White (York University), "Dada in Debate" will be published as an independent supplement to the important new Dada studies issued in direct conjunction with the exhibition. National Gallery curator Leah Dickerman, however, was determined to bring as much coherence as possible to the sprawling subject, into seven sections corresponding to the cities where Dada flourished most. She thus followed the same linear organizational prototype selected by Duchamp himself when he organized "Dada 1916-1923" for the Sidney Janis Gallery in New York in 1953. Including some key examples of Dada printed matter, but no manuscript materials, Duchamp assembled 212 items, which he divided into eight consecutive urban episodes: Zurich, New York, Hannover, Cologne, Berlin, Paris, Amsterdam and Other Centers. Dickerman, as had Duchamp. featured in the "Zurich" section a sample of the works made by Picabia during his brief visit to the Swiss Dada center in early 1919. Whether by way of the January 1919 issue of Picabia's extraordinary periodical 391, which Duchamp included in his 1953 show, or the images Picabia contributed to Dada 4-5, as the poet Tristan Tzara's publication was titled, Picabia's wheel-ridden images were immediately circulated from Zurich throughout every other Dada city, transcending any lingering notion of isolated Dada cells and immediately inspiring wheel others. Dada 4-5 featured a reproduction of a print that Picabia had just made by pressing on paper the inked gears of an alarm clock that he had destroyed as a sort of object lesson to his Swiss colleagues when he first met them in person. // Francis Picabia: Alarm Clock I, illustration on the title page of the journal Dada 4-5: Dada Anthology. Tristan Tzara, editor. May 1919, line block reproduction of ink drawing. 10 by 7 inches. National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. All Picabia works c Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York. Photograph Above, banner of Marcel Duchamp's L.H.O.O.Q., 1919; at the National Gallery of Art. Photo Rob Shelley, c National Gallery of Art. All Duchamp works c ARS. Right, Francis Picabia after Duchamp: Dada Painting by Marcel Duchamp: LHOOQ, cover illustration for the journal 391, no. 12, editor and publisher Francis Picabia, March 1920, letterpress, 21 7/8 by 15 inches. Research Although unlisted in Matthew S. Witkovsky's most helpful, city-by-city 1911-1926 chronology (included in both of the very different French and American exhibition catalogues), Washington, D.C., events can hardly be ignored in any historical account of the Dada movement.3 Promoting "Dada" at the entrance to the I. M. Pei-designed East Building of the National Gallery was a billboard-style image of L.H.O.O.Q. (1919), Duchamp's famously defaced reproduction of Leonardo da Vinci's Mono, Lisa accompanied by the title inscription, which, read aloud in French, constitutes an irreverent Dada commentary on the portrait's subject.4 Flaunted here, of all places, Duchamp's unsurpassed icon of modern art's contempt for museum values (and, by the way, a work not included in the 1936 MOMA exhibition) would surely have dismayed retired secretary of the Treasury, Andrew W. Mellon, under investigation in late 1936 for income tax evasion. Just before Christmas of that year, Mellon sent word to President Franklin D. Roosevelt that he wished to give the nation, along with the funds to construct a National Gallery of Art on the Mall. When Congress accepted this extraordinary gift in March 1937, it was with the stipulation that no work of lesser quality ever be added to the collection. So drastically have museum art standards changed since then, in large part thanks to Dada, that could the National Gallery manage to acquire this Duchamp "masterpiece" (now owned by a private collector in Paris, its market value somewhere around $10 million), the museum would certainly be justified in boasting about it. Income tax and its evasion played an important role in the development of America as a showcase for living artists from other countries. As I understand it, legislation promulgating the federal income tax was passed by Congress in February 1913 in order to make up for the revenues that would be lost when the government removed tariffs on imported goods-a gesture meant to discourage foreign tariffs on booming American exports. Indeed, the Woodrow Wilson administration eliminated import taxes on a wide 13,1913. Writing enthusiastically about the global art-market implications of the Underwood legislation in the May 12, 1914, issue of Parix-Joiimal, poet-critic-art impresario Guillaume Apollinaire expressed frustration that nonAmerican artists had till then been obliged to file tariff-exempting export papers at the American Embassy.5 Presumably the proto-Dada Apollinaire (to whom an entry is devoted in the French catalogue) was privy to the problems faced by Parisbased Constantin Brancusi when he sent sculptures to New York in early 1914 for exhibition at Alfred Stieglitz's famous 291 Gallery. The works were held up by U.S. Customs officials pending receipt of an affidavit stating that the works were made by the artist himself, and none of them realized in more than three examples.6 Setting the stage for an explosion of American galleries with the capacity to represent living European artists, the Underwood Tariff Act was primarily what created the conditions for Dada art to be exhibited in New York before it was shown anywhere else. Equally important, by placing esthetic decisions under the administration of American Customs and Embassy officials, the status to the now tediously perennial question, so very fundamental to Dada, of what might or might not be considered to be art. As if to take issue with the Underwood Tariff Act's bias in favor of art unrelated to industrial manufacture, by the end of 1915 Francis Picabia's diagrammatic images of machines with humorous inscribed titles (which were first presented as illustrations in 291, Stieglitz's deluxe modern-art periodical) began to appear in New York gallery exhibitions. The pioneering status of New York Dada was obscured in the National Gallery installation, the opening section of which was devoted to "Zurich," where the term Dada was supposedly invented in early 1916 as a sort of brand name for the zealously unconventional activities of an international colony of writers, artists and performers escaping military action in neutral Switzerland. Omitted from the Washington version of the exhibition was the 1884 illustrated edition of Jules Verne's L'' toile du Sud (The Southern Star), which was on view at the Centre Pompidou a pet ostrich named "Dada." Such an impressive piece of evidence to support the French paternity claim to Dada would have been bolstered considerably by references to the goofy proto-Dada items (such as a woman's stocking presented as a basrelief) exhibited by humorists in Paris beginning in 1882 at the popular annual Arts Incohrents benefit exhibitions. "But neither the Paris nor the Washington exhibition did much justice to the key forerunners of official 1915-23 Dada. Photograph Visitors at the National Gallery's "Dada" exhibition viewing (left) Duchamp's Rotary Demisphere, 192$, Disks Bearing Spirals, 1923, and four Disks Inscribed with Puns, 1926; right, Picabia's Optophone, ca. 1927. Photo Rob Shelley. c National Gallery of Art. // Aside from how it confuses chronological issues, the city-by-city organization at the National Gallery disregarded how two or more cities can have equally reasonable historical claims to some key Dada works. Take the core Dada idea of considering a functional manufactured object as art. It was, when, during a visit to an aircraft exhibition in Paris with Fernand Lger and Brancusi, he asked what contemporary artist could make a work any better than a propeller. Although Duchamp first gave physical form to this challenge in his Paris studio in 1913, it was the "New York" section of the National Gallery's installation that included his earliest "readymades," Bicycle Wieel (1913) and Bottle Rack (1914) -not the original Paris works, lost long ago, but replicas made with the artist's approval, in 1951 and 1964 respectively. It was in New York, however, that Duchamp first included a manufactured object in an art exhibition, not Bicycle Wheel, nor Bottle Rack, but a Dada object that addressed Washington tax policy! Congressman Oscar Wilder Underwood was seemingly invoked by one of Duchamp's two readymades included in the Apr. 3-29,1916, "Exhibition of Modern Art" at the Bourgeois Gallery in New York: Traveler's Folding Item, the soft form-fitting cover (inscribed keep dust out of the world's leading typewriters, manufactured by a Connecticut company with no relation to the politician, as far as I know. Given the Washington connection, it is too bad that the 1964 replica of Traveler's Folding Item (the original of which was apparently discarded by Duchamp) was not included in the National Gallery's version of the show, as it had been at the Centre Pompidou. The Dada replica issue still bedevils art historians, collectors and museum professionals. In 1987, during the course of being interviewed for the curatorship of 20th-century painting and sculpture at the Art Institute of Chicago, I was asked what I considered to be the most significant modern work still in private hands and so hypothetically available for acquisition. Although it hardly amounts to a painting (few Dada works do), I felt obliged to designate L.H.O.O.Q., albeit with misgivings about whether trustee support could be forthcoming for what even then might have been a multimillion dollar expenditure on a color reproduction vandalized with a interview, I went on to explain how this "same" work could be obtained-in concept, at least-for far less, since Duchamp had issued a full-color replica version in 1964 (in an edition of 35), which sold then for as little as $10,000. For museum display purposes, the replica would have essentially the same value as the unique original, at least in my opinion. But in 1987 even that far smaller price seemed ridiculous to traditional modern art collectors. Regardless of whether the museum's library already owned one, I suggested that it would be best to acquire a copy of the March 1920 issue of 391, then available for something like $2,000. That particular issue of 391 included the first-ever reproduction of LH.O.O.Q., "inaccurate," to be sure-for reasons explained below-but arguably no less important than the original, which Duchamp otherwise never made public until he exhibited it in Paris in 1930, after the Dada movement was a thing of the past. Although I got the job and went get ahold of during my years at the Art Institute, I never managed to obtain any version oil.H.O.O.Q. I was delighted to see the Duchamp original and the March 1920 391 replica juxtaposed in the National Gallery display.8 Photograph Picabia: Dance of Saint Guy, 1919-20, later refabricated and retitled Tabac-Rat (Rat Tobacco) by the artist, 1946-49, twine, board and ink in open gilt wood frame, 41 1/8 by 33 fraction three-eighth inches. Centre Pompidou, Paris. // Pieabia: Dada Picture: Portrait of Czanne..., illustration in the journal Cannibale (Cannibal), no. I, Francis Pieabia editor and publisher, April 1920, 9 7/8 by 6 1/8 inches. Centre Pompidou. // Duchamp had plenty of opportunities to exhibit LH.O.O.Q. around the time he first made it, whether in Paris-either at the annual exhibitions of the anything-goes Socit des Indpendants, or at any of the still more unorthodox spring Dada group exhibitions-or in New York at one of the exhibitions organized beginning in late April 1920 at president never contributed anything, although two of his works were lent by collectors). See article this issue. Dada-minded, Duchamp seemingly preferred that LH.O.O.Q. be known exclusively through reproduction, as was already the case with his infamous Fountain (1917). A Stieglitz photograph of Fountain had appeared right away as an illustration in the second number of the New York Dada journal Tiie Blind Man, whereas the original readymade sculpture (an unmodified urinal) was never exhibited, sold or even preserved for future use.11 So while experimental collage and assemblage works by Cubist and Futurist artists had already incorporated fragments of everyday stuff like newspapers and fabrics into works of art, Duchamp and his Dada colleagues seemingly sought, in an anti-collage spirit, to insert images of artworks made for that purpose into everyday nonart formats, such as newssheets and magazines. When it was up to him. Duchamp preferred after 1917 not to exhibit his own works. Invited to contribute a work to the Salon Dada at the Galerie Montaigne in Paris in June pode bal," recently translated as "bollocks to you." 10 Its status open to debate, either period relic or unorthodox example of what today would count as correspondence art, Duchamp's anti-exhibition telegram was shown at the Centre Pompidou version of "Dada." Photograph Man Ray: Lampshade, 1954 (artist's later version of his aluminum replica of his lost 1919/20 original, which has a found broken paper lampshade on a stand), painted aluminum. 60 1/8 by 25 inches. Centre Pompidou. Courtesy RMN/ Art Resource. New York. Lampshade, ca. early 1920s, published with the caption "sheet-iron sculpture, 1919." in Georges Kibemont-Dessaignes, Man Ray. Paris, Librarie Gallimard, 5th edition, 1924. // Whether or not they were illustrated in periodicals, during the heyday of the movement (roughly 1915-23), unexhibited and/or lost works were something of a Dada specialty. Reminiscing in the 1960s about the "Incorrect" reproduction of LH.O.O.Q., published in the March 1920 issue of 391)," Duchamp explained how Picabia, lacking a photograph of the work in question, simply made his own version from another reproduction of Leonardo's famous painting, in the event adding a mustache, as Duchamp himself had done, but "forgetting" to add a goatee." Whether best considered as "neglectfully incorrect," "satirically unfinished" or "judiciously edited," the lack of such an essential detail as the goatee nevertheless makes Picabia's humorously inept reproduction of his friend's pictorial joke intriguingly comparable to his own lost blackboard work, the punningly titled Riz au Nez (Laugh in Your Face), which was erased before the eyes of the audience at the first Paris Dada event on Jan. 23, 1920.12 The following year, rumors circulated that Picabia might send to the Salon d'Automne a work designed to explode, and all the target images in his works of the early 1920s could be understood as so many invitations for viewers to take aim at them.13 To the best of my knowledge L.H.O.O.Q. is lost to posterity, as if once it had served its purpose as the basis for the 391 illustration, it was not worth keeping. At the Dada-Vorfrhling exhibition in Cologne in April 1920, Max Ernst presented a (since lost) work along with a hatchet for anyone wishing to obliterate it. Such prototypes by Picabia and Ernst must have guided Man Ray when, at the tail end of Dada in 1923 (if we take his word for it), he attached the image of an eye excerpted from some unwanted photograph to the blade of a metronome, resulting in a magnificent plastic poem about romantic obsession, which he titled Object to be Destroyed. But as far as 1 know, Man Ray did not exhibit this sculpture until 1933, on the occasion of a Surrealist group show at a Paris gallery. Photograph Man Ray: Tristan Tzara, 1921, gelatin silver print, 4 1/8 by 2 inches. Bluff Collection. All Man Ray works c Man Ray Trust/ARS/ADAGP. Paris. // National Gallery exhibition incorporated Object to be Destroyed (now known as Indestructible Object) in the guise of a quite fine replica from a 1964 edition that would not be out of place in an inclusive survey of the Pop-art era. Recalling the pre-Pop years when Dada art was still a risky affair, art historian Robert Rosenblum expressed good-natured dismay after seeing "Dada" at the National Gallery. Noting the absence of a sufficiently rambunctious and historically accurate account of the 1915-1923 spirit, he asked me, "Where were the hammers and axes to destroy the art?" To the degree that the presentation of the Dada works in Washington was thoughtful, and often elegant, to that same degree the presentation disregarded the essential and determining values of many artworks never intended for exhibition in the first place.14 It is not clear whether Picabia ever exhibited some of his most amateurishly vulgar and iconoclastic works, for example, the assemblage consisting of a toy monkey affixed to a backboard, its right arm raised in emphasis, while its masturbation. "Portrait of Czanne, Portrait of Renoir, Still Lives, Portrait of Rembrandt" is carelessly inscribed on the backboard support around the monkey. Documented by a photograph that illustrates the first issue of Cannibale, a new Picabia journal appearing in April 1920, the original ultra-Dada work would count as a masterpiece, had it survived. But it did not, because it was not intended to. Picabia (who died in 1953, before market and museum demand for exhibition copies of lost Dada works intensified) never replicated this monkey assemblage, although in the late 1940s he did make a replica of another work from early 1920. Consisting of an empty picture frame, with "identifying" labels on strings stretched across its back, this "missing" work was exhibited at the 1922 Salon des Indpendants, documented with a snapshot, and then seemingly discarded.15 Acquired in 1988 by the Centre Pompidou, the unique 1946-49 replica was admirably installed at the National Gallery, the wall cut away around it so that see views through its void. We can only guess how Picabia intended it to be presented in the early 1920s. Photograph Man Ray: Obstruction, 1961 (replica of 1920 original), wooden coat hangers, 43 by 47 by 47 inches. Moderna Museet, Stockholm. // Issues of loss and replication have especially obscured the status of Man Ray as a pioneering Dada master. Made in Dada fashion from trash, his Lampshade (1919) has the distinction of being the first Dada object ever to be acquired by a museum-in 1920. But by January 1921 the patron of the so-called Socit Anonyme, Katherine Dreier, who had purchased the work, informed the artist that since the original cardboard Lampshade readymade had gone limp, she would appreciate a replica in metal. Presumably the earliest photographs of this work, including the one sold as a postcard by Dreier's private New York museum, show the first replicated version of the work, consisting of a long white rectangular form attached at opposite corners to a, simultaneously presenting interior and exterior surfaces, recto and verso, from every possible point of view, while projecting its own shadow onto itself as well as onto its surroundings. (There is a reproduction of the Socit Anonyme Lampshade in the July 1920 number of 391.) Known only from a photograph, another sheet-metal version of Lampshade, this one made in Paris in the early 1920s, shows the work (without any pole element) attached at one corner to the ceiling so that it spirals downwards. It is unknown whether the artist modified the work because he could not find the right sort of pole in Paris, whether (as seems more likely) he felt obliged not to copy a work already in Dreier's possession, or whether he had evolved a more advanced idea of the original work. Whatever the case may be, the version included in the National Gallery's New York section of "Dada" is a 1954 variation (issued in 1959 as an edition of 100) of this, Man Ray's lost 1920 accumulation sculpture made from 63 coat hangers (or, rather, his 1961 replica of the lost original) were installed overhead at the National Gallery, similarly to how Alexander Calder installed his mobile sculptures beginning in the 1930s. While Obstruction is quite beautiful presented as an overhead work, it hardly gets in the way of anything, as called for by its Dada title. By contrast, the Pompidou version of "Dada" included the 1920 Man Ray photograph that at first had been titled Moving Sculpture, printed from a glass plate negative (roughly 3 by 4 inches in size), showing windswept white linens hanging from clotheslines. This quintessential Dada documentary photograph concerns the same unprecedented modern issues addressed in Obstruction and Lampshade: the possibility of sculpture as an intrusion or a physical barrier; and the possibility of sculpture as a surface matrix for cinematic interplays of light and shadow. Unfortunately for his historical reputation, Man Ray, with Dada nonchalance, never exhibited nor later bothered to frequently something ominous about the hanging "sculptures" depicted in Dada-period Man Ray photographs. For example, Man Ray's 1921 manipulated photograph of Dada impresario Tristan Tzara features a threatening "sculpture" comprising a rope dangling from a pulley (if that is what it is) with a hatchet tied to one end and an alarm clock to the other. Whether or not this sculpture should be attributed to Man Ray, it is a Dada gem. Man Ray receives full credit for a similar, never exhibited and now lost "sculpture" on the danger theme: Compass (1920). Documented as a sort of perverse trompe-l'oeil still life in a 1920 photograph the size of his glass-plate negative, Compass consisted of a suspended horseshoe magnet which has attracted a World War I era semi-automatic pistol. In the National Gallery installation, Compass hung nearby the pair of enlarged photographs that Man Ray had made to send to Paris for exhibition at the June 1921 Salon Dada. Titled Mm and Woman, these photos document still eggbeater, lightbulb reflectors, clothespins), works that to my knowledge were never exhibited by Man Ray as sculptures. And what about his famous Gift' '! Created on impulse on the eve of Man Ray's historic December 1921 solo exhibition in Paris (and thus not included in that exhibition's checklist), the flat clothes iron with upholstery tacks glued to its pressing surface was evidently stolen at the exhibition opening. Unless the artist managed to photograph the work as soon as it was finished, the undated photograph that documents the work, first published in the artist's 1963 autobiography, Self-Portrait, probably shows a replica of the immediately lost original. As far as I know, it was in 1953 that Man Ray first showed any replica version of the object itself, at the "Dada 1916-1923" exhibition at Sidney Janis. Since then it has become a famous Dada sculpture. During the Dada era itself, however, the artist seemingly discarded his three-dimensional works once he had recorded them in photographs-so but photographs of works of art, created with no call to survive except as documentation. Photograph Below, view of Der Merzbau, photographed ca. 1930, Kurt Schwitters Archiv Im Sprengel Museum Hannover. c 2005 Schwitters/ARS/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn. Photograph Right, reconstruction of Kurt Schwitters's Der Merzbau at the National Gallery of Art. Photo Bob Shelley, c 2006 National Gallery of Art. // Giorgio de Chirico: The Great Metaphysician, 1917, oil on canvas, 41 1/8Vs by 27 inches. // While both the French and English versions of the Dada exhibition catalogue include sections about film as a key Dada enterprise, neither publication addresses the many issues raised by Dada "photography," thanks to which works like L.H.O.O.Q. could infiltrate every Dada city with unprecedented speed. Duchamp, for one, pondered Dada works that he evidently never felt obliged to realize, since they could be so easily evoked by words alone." Without glue-Make an assembly of "readymades" balanced one on top of the other and photograph them of a table thus prepared with as many fragile objects as possible, make one good print and then break the plate. - "On the other hand, he did realize and photographically document a now-lost readymade sculpture of a square of hanging gauze in Draft Piston (1914). Incorporating a documentary photograph of an "accumulation" of cigarette butts, Man Ray's extraordinary collage on plywood, Trans Atlantique (1921), included in the Centre Pompidou version of "Dada," corresponds with yet another of Duchamp's "Photo" notes: "piles-heaps-of similar things (stretcher keys) (sponges 10th St.)" 18 It seems essential to stress that by the time Man Ray began to print his photographs as works of art, rather than as documentary reproductions, he had moved on from Dada. But what sort of historical status as sculpture, if any, should be extended to the objects documented in his Dada photographs, or Duchamp's photographs documenting objects that were never replicated after World War II replicate or not to replicate-that was and still is the Dada question par excellence. // Left, Man Bay's Dadaphoto, in the magazine New York Dada, editors Duchamp and Man Ray, April 1921. Photograph Man Ray: Dadaphoto, 1920, later titled Portemanteau (Coat Stand), gelatin silver print, 15 7/8 by 10 inches. Centre Pompidou, Courtesy Runion des Muses Nationaux/Art Resource. // Although no one has ever attempted to "reconstruct" any of the Dada-like sculptures "documented" in many Dada-era drawings and paintings by Giorgio de Chirico-notably the ambitious Dada-style public junk monument portrayed in The Great Metaphysician (1917), so foolishly deaccessioned, first by Albert C. Barnes and more recently by the Museum of Modern Art in New York-the tailor-shop mannequin sculptures in these works were surely the inspiration for two of the highlights of the current exhibition, included both in Washington and Paris. I refer to the impressive exhibition copies of lost tailordummy assemblages made for the First International Dada Fair, presented in Berlin in ceiling sculpture by John Heartfield and Rudolf Schlichter, reconstructed in 2004; and The Middle-Class Philistine Heartjield Gone Wild, by Heartfield and George Grosz, reconstructed in 1988. The meticulously careful exhibition copies of these lost masterpieces are both based on images of the originals in publicity photographs commissioned by the organizers of the 1920 Dada Fair." "The opportunity to see them inevitably aroused the wish to see modern reconstructions of, among many other items, the closely related lost tailor-dummy works made by Kurt Schwitters in Hannover and Man Ray in New York, works never exhibited, from what I have been able to learn. Seeing all four together would convey the extent of dialogue among geographically separated Dada centers during the 1915-23 Dada heyday. Photograph Left, George Grosz and John Hearlfield: The Middle-Class Philistine Heartfield Gone Wild. 1988 (reconstruction of 1920 original), tailor's dummy and mixed mediums, 86 5/8 inches high including base. Berlinische Galerie. c Estate of George Grosz/licensed by VAGA, New York. c 2005 Sacred Conversation), 1921, photograph of photomontage and collage, 8 7/8 by 5 inches. Prirate collection. Ernst works c ARS. // Illustrated and discussed in the American catalogue, the Schwitters tailor-dummy assemblage, known as The Holy Affliction (ca. 1920), appears to be a direct response to the Heartfleld-Grosz mannequin assemblage included at the Dada Fair. Schwitters eventually incorporated The Holy Affliction into his monumental Merzbau environment, located at the back of his home in Hannover. As is well known, Schwitters's prolonged development of the Merzbau was interrupted when the artist fled Nazi Germany in 1937, and the work in progress was destroyed in 1943 as a result of the war-easily the most serious loss among all the many Dada works that did not survive. Using photographs that document the appearance of the Schwitters interior as it evolved from around 1925 (nine such photographs were included in the historic 1936 Museum of Modern Art exhibition), the installation department at the National Gallery replicated some of its expressionistically faceted walls as a replicated) Merz collages on view in the "Hannover" section of the exhibition. While these works were made in Hannover to be sure, it would have been nice to include at least a few of them in the "New York" section, since so many of the Schwitters works on view had been displayed by Dreier at her Socit Anonyme already in 1920, and then immediately acquired by her. It seems likely that Dreier attended the Dada Fair during her visit to Germany in the summer of 1920 and no less likely that she obtained a copy Dada Almanack, the Richard Huelsenbeck-edited monograph published that year in Berlin. Dada Almanack includes an exhibition publicity photograph showing Heartfleld and Grosz standing beside The Middle-Class Philistine Heartfleld Gone Wild, a tailor dummy with one of its legs replaced by a prosthesis, as if the artists intended it to represent an amputee veteran. My considered guess is that this photographic documentation of the Heartfleld-Grosz assemblage is what prompted Man Ray in New York to create his famous Dadaphoto, the, half life model (probably the infamous Baroness Eisa von Freytag-Loringhoven) .20 Because she is wearing a single black stocking that disappears against a black background, she appears to be missing her lower right leg. Imagine if Man Ray had ever exhibited this living Dada sculpture! The artist evidently created the work specifically as a reproduction for the unique April 1921 issue of New York Dada, in which it was printed in blue inks and (erroneously) laid out as a horizontal image. The New York Dada version is perhaps best described as documentation of a collage, since Man Ray pasted a postage stamp on the photograph to cover the pubic hair of his model, as if to self-censor the image for publication. No trace has ever been found of the strange mannequin armature component of this remarkable work, now titled Coat Stand. The damaged print of Coat Stand included in the National Gallery exhibition must be the remnant of the collage illustrated in the 1921 periodical, the postage stamp clumsily removed at some unknown date response to Heartfleld and Grosz's The Middle-Class Philistine Heartfleld Gone Wild, made in Berlin in 1920, Man Ray's Coat Stand, made in New York, in turn inspired some key Dada images made by Max Ernst in 1921 in Cologne. The close similarities between Coat Stand and a lost collage by Ernst titled Santa conversazione (1921), known from four period photographic replicas, can hardly be coincidental. The principal standing female figure in Santa conversazione is the sort of lifelike educational mannequin made for human biology classrooms, with body sections that can be removed to reveal internal organs. With the skin layer removed from the anatomical model's lower right leg, she looks like an amputee twin to the Man Ray female figure in Coat Stand. Considering the image of a dove that Ernst added as a collage element to cover (partly) the crotch of the figure in Santa conversazione, he probably had access to a copy of New York Dada illustrating the Man Ray collage image with the postage stamp as a Ernst and Man Ray were on exactly the same Dada page by the end of 1921. And Ernst treated the subject of a nude with one problem lower leg in another work, one of the eleven collages chosen by Paul Eluard during the course of his visit to Cologne in November 1921 to bring back to Paris to be reproduced for Rptitions, his brilliant 1922 volume of verse. (This one appeared in the D.C. show.) Lacking its head, the female figure in this collage has the distinction of being the first of Ernst's signature Surrealist images of headless women, developed after he settled in Paris. The surprise is that Man Ray is not among the Paris Dada personalities included inAu rendez-vous des amis (1922), Ernst's ambitious group portrait of leading Dada personalities, painted after he arrived in the French capital. After all, the nocturnal glacier background in Au rendez-vous des amis could be understood as a response to the startling Rayograph images that Man Ray had published so successfully as a portfolio Ray, Tzara, Picabia and Duchamp are all likewise missing in Ernst's Dada group portrait. Their combined absence is symptomatic of the final Dada irony, that just as the far-flung members of the group began to assemble in Paris with the prospect of a stronger-than-ever Dada, interest in the movement dissipated rather quickly instead. Did Washington politics have anything to do with the end of Dada, as it had contributed to the movement's outset? seemingly so. With the passage of the National Prohibition Act in October 1919, New York ceased to be a magnet for artists. Alcohol-addicted European talents like Picabia never returned, and such leading international-minded American visual artists as Man Ray had little choice but to emigrate. With his most ambitious work, the ultra-fragile Large Glass, under way in New York, Duchamp found himself somewhat obliged to remain, but in February 1920 he wrote to one of his paramours, Yvonne Chastel, "One doesn't drink here any more and it's quiet, too quiet." decision to leave his ambitious project definitively unfinished, with the result that he was free to spend less time in New York and more time in Paris. Rather than venture into the polemics of Surrealism, Duchamp would henceforth devote himself fanatically to the reproduction in facsimile of his pre-Prohibition notes and drawings, published as the so-called "Green Box" in 1934, and then to the replication in miniature of his paintings and objects as the so-called Bote en valise, finished in New York in 1941, where he had returned to avoid the nightmares of World War II. It seems fair to say that Duchamp's uninterrupted devotion to the movement's original replica spirit provided a great deal of the impetus for the creation, during the 1950s and 1960s of modern version of classic Dada works. Without these replicas the current exhibition would of necessity be full of holes. Photograph Max Ernst: Au Rendez-vous des Amis (At the Rendezvous of Friends), 1922, oil on canvas, 51 by 76 inches. Museum Ludwig Paradoxically, while these replicas contradict Dada's original destructive premises, they nevertheless perpetuate its achievement and moreover gave license to a new genre of replica art, pioneered by Elaine Sturtevant and extended by Sherrie Levine and Mike Bidlo, among many others, as an ongoing Dada dividend ever since. In her recent show at Paula Cooper Gallery in New York, Levine included replicas she had created of two Man Ray photographs on view in the National Gallery "Dada" show, photographs which are themselves documentations of the lost originals. As Dada as can be, the American correspondence-art master Ray Johnson put it best, in 1972, when he meditated in a nearly empty room. His only dcor was an address label on which he had printed: "Dada is never right." From my own conversations with the artist, I would venture that he left the all too obvious unsaid: "Even so, Dada is still better than the next best thing." Photograph Sherrie Levine: After Man Ray: Man by 13 inches each. Courtesy Paula Cooper Gallery, New York. Photograph Ray Johnson: Dada Is Never Right, 1972, address label. 3 by 5 inches. Collection Charles Stuckey. Sidebar Images of wheels are abundant, none more dramatic than Duchamp's striped plates spinning like frightening, albeit hypnotizing, propellers. Sidebar Picabia's assemblage of a toy monkey affixed to a backboard would qualify as an ultra-Dada masterpiece, had it survived. But it wasn't intended to. Sidebar Schwitters's Merzbau project was interrupted when he fled Nazi Germany in 1937, and the work was destroyed in 1943-easily Dada's most serious loss. Sidebar Almost certainly the Heartfield-Grosz assemblage of a tailor dummy with a prosthetic leg led to Man Ray's famous "Dadaphoto" of a one-legged female. Reference 1. Jrgen Schfer, ed., Exquisite Dado: A Comprehensive Bibliography, ("Crisis and the Arts: The History of Dada," vol. 10), Farmington Hills, Mich., Thomas Gale, 2005. Other notable edited by Lean Dickerman in anticipation of "Dada": Dada: A Special Issue, October 105 (Summer 2003); and (co-edited with Matthew S. Witkovsky) The Dada Seminars, (CASVA Seminar Papers 1), Washington, D.C., the National Gallery of Art in association with D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers. Inc., 2005. Highly recommended is a lavishly illustrated account of Dada (everywhere but New York) by one of the leading Dada scholars, published to coincide with the Paris presentation: Marc Dachy, archives dada/ chronique, Paris, Hazan, 2005. 2. Laurent Le Bon, "Introduction." m Dada, Paris, ditions du Centre Pompidou, 2005, p. 516. 3. Witkovsky's "Chronologie," in Dada, pp. 218-59, the sole part of the Paris catalogue arranged by city. The only other text shared by the Pompidou and National Gallery of Art catalogues is Lean Dickerman's "Zurich" essay, which, curiously, has one extra footnote (no. 136), the letters sound like the slang phrase, "Elle a chaud au cul," meaning, "She is in heat." 5. Guillaume Apollinaire, Apollinaire on Art, Essays and Reviews, 1902-1918 (The Documents of 20th-century Art), ed. LeRoy C. Breunig, trans. Susan Suleiman, New York, Viking Press, 1972, pp. 380-81. 6. see Ann Temkin, "Constantin Brancusi, 1914, Startling Lucidity" in Sara Greenough, ed., Modem Art and America, Alfred Stieglitz and His New York Galleries, Washington, D. C., National Gallery of Art, 2001, pp. 155-163 and 502. 7. For Jules Verne, see French Dada catalogue entry Autruche; for the Incohrents, see Luce Abls and Catherine Charpin, Arts incohrents, acadmie du drisoire (Les Dossiers du Muse d'Orsay, 46), Paris, Runion des muses nationaux, 1992; and Phillip Dennis Gate and Man,' Shaw, eds., ne Spirit of Montmartre: Cabarets, Humor, and the Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 1996. 8. The French edition of Dada, pp. 556-58, contains an entry on the various versions olL.H.O.O.Q., although not the 1964 one. 9. Considering how Duchamp's patrons Louise and Walter Arensberg acquired the great majority of his works at this time, the fact that Fountain failed to survive raises the possibility that the artist had little, if any. interest in its preservation, at least not until 1950, when he created the first of an eventual 15 fullsize replica versions for exhibition and market opportunities. One wonders what, if anything, is to be made of the fact that the Arensbergs acquired only three of Duchamp's so-called readymades during the World War I years. 10. Francis M. Naumann and Hector Obalk, eds., Affectionately, Marcel: The Selected Correspondence of Marcel Duchamp, Ghent and Amsterdam, Ludion Press, 2000, p. 98. 11. Arturo Schwartz, The Complete Works of Marcel Duchamp, 3rd revised, p. 671 (no. 369a); and Pierre Cabanne, Dialogues with Marcel Duchamp, trans. Ron Padgett, New York, Viking, 1971, pp. 62-63. 12. Michel Sanouillet, Dada Paris, Paris, Jean-Jacques Pauvert, I960, p. 146; and Janine Mileaf and Matthew S. Witkovsky, "Paris" in Dada, Washington, D.C., National Gallery of Art, 2005, pp. 351-52. 13. William Camfield, Francis Picabia, His Art, Life and Times, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1979, p. 168. 14. Both Le Bon, in the French edition of Dada, p. 516; and Dickerman, in the Washington edition of the catalogue, p. 14, bring attention to ways in which a modern museum exhibition inevitably distorts primary Dada issues. 15. see Camfield, pp. 172-73, for how Picabia considered the idea of incorporating white mice on a treadmill into this work as a kind of living sculpture. And for Picabia's use of the empty frame as a 1920, see William Camfield, in Francis Picabia: Singulier idal, Paris, Muse d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, 2002, p. 201. 16. See Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes, Man Ray, Paris, Librarie Gallimard, 1924 (actually around 1929; the stated date of publication is purposely incorrect to increase its value as a collector's item), p. 37. In the caption the work is dated 1919 in accord with the date of the original cardboard version. 17. See Marcel Duchamp, Notes, trans., Paul Matisse, Paris, Centre National d'Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou, 1980, no. 167. Reproduced in the Paris version of the Dada catalogue on p. 379, this note nevertheless does not seem to be included in the list of exhibited Duchamp manuscripts on pp. 589-91. 18. see Sail Seller, The Writings of Marcel Duchamp (Marchand du Sel), eds. Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Peterson, New York, Oxford University Press, 1973, pp. 74 and 76. 19. see Brigid, p. 100. 20. For a brilliant account of Man Ray's Dadapholo, see George Baker, "Keep Smiling," in The Dada Seminars, pp. 191-220. This very Man Ray document work was eventually reproduced as a paradigm of Dada in the 1925 anthology Die Kunstismen=Les Ismes de lart, edited by Jean Arp and El Lissitzky. For a reproduction, see the French edition of Dada, p. 561. 21. For the Ernst photographic reproductions of collage originals, see Werner Spies ed., Max Ernst, Werke 1906-1925, Houston, Menu Foundation, and Cologne, M. Dumont Schauberg, 1975, nos. 374-75, 376-77, 392-94, 396-97, 401-02,413-14,421-24 and 425. It is important to mention that the exchange between Ernst and Man Ray benefited both artists. Most famously, Man Ray's Puriculture (1921), first replicated in 1937, was based directly on an Ernst collage in the collection of Tzara: Armada v. Duldgedalzen, 1919 (Spies, no. 300). But Ernst may have also seen in an exhibition in Cologne in November 1921, at the time when Paul and Gala Eluard were visiting the city to meet the German artist. There is scarcely any information about which Man Ray works were on view in that 1921 exhibition, however, so it may never be possible to know whether it was reproduced works by the American artist that prompted Ernst to utilize photographs as enlarged replica images for the circulation of some of his best known Dada pieces. Quite possibly Ernst had already reached the decision on his OWTI to make such photographic reproductions, but it is worth noting that he did not include any in the solo exhibition of his Dada works that opened in May 1921 in Paris, while he remained in Germany. Not included in Ernst's 1921 Paris catalogue, Sonia conversazione perhaps should be dated to the latter part of the same year. 22. Calvin Tomkins, Duchamp, A Biography, New York, Henry Holt and Company, 1996, p. 224. "Dada" opened at the Muse. 5, 2005-Jan. 9, 2006, and traveled to the National Gallery of Art, Washington, B.C. Feb. 19-May H, 20061. It will open this month at the Museum of Modern Art, New York June 18-SepL 11, 2006. Author Affiliation Author: Charles Stuckey is an art historian based in Chicago. //
It's four in the morning and I'm fighting to stay awake. I hope some more hot tea and cookies will help recharge my system sufficiently so I can choose which star gets the honor of the last exposure. This is my third and final night on the Mayall 4-meter telescope on Kitt Peak, outside Tucson, Arizona, and so far it has been the clearest night of the three. I think I'll finally get some good spectra for our white dwarf study. This observing project is a collaboration among Caty Pilachowski of Kitt Peak National Observatory, Bob Milkey of the Space Telescope Science Institute, and me. Caty and Bob are attending astronomical meetings elsewhere, so one of my contributions to the project is making the observations. Although I'm observing in November, our project got started the previous February when we submitted a proposal to the telescope allocation committee requesting three nights on the 4-meter telescope. We need its light-gathering power to observe our faint white dwarfs. And the 4-meter has a special spectrometer that enables us to measure accurately white dwarf all three nights. I felt quite lucky because most telescopes on Kitt Peak are oversubscribed. For the August 1991 to February 1992 observing semester, only 49 out of 111 proposals were granted time on the 4-meter, so some astronomers will have to reapply next year when their objects are again visible. The stars we are interested in are called DA white dwarfs. Roughly two-thirds of white dwarfs are of type DA. When the Sun finally uses up its nuclear fuel, it most likely will end its life as this type of white dwarf. The D signifies that the spectrum comes from a degenerate star. (The pressure created by electrons in a special state called degeneracy prevents white dwarfs from collapsing.) The A refers to the fact that only hydrogen lines are visible in the star's spectrum. These stars typically range in temperature from 10,000 to 50,000 kelvins, in mass from 0.2 to 0.9 solar mass, and in radius from 6,000 to 15,000 kilometers. So these stars are hotter than the Sun (Specifically, our project is to measure how quickly these white dwarfs rotate. During the run, we hope to obtain accurate rotation rates for a few more white dwarfs. We also want to observe several white dwarfs again because their rotation rates are uncertain. We measure the rotation rate of a white dwarf by analyzing the shape of the red hydrogen-alpha line in the star's spectrum. Preferably, we would like to use more than one line, but DA white dwarfs produce few lines in their spectra (see spectra on page 41). (Spectra omitted). Rotation makes spectral lines broader. By measuring how broad a star's spectral lines are, we can tell how fast the star rotates. A star like the Sun is considered a slow rotator because it rotates only once every 25 days. But the Sun's rotation rate will become even slower when the Sun runs out of nuclear fuel in its core and expands into a red giant star. Like a figure skater who extends the arms to as a red giant. But this isn't the final step in the Sun's aging process. After the red giant phase, it will become a white dwarf. To become a white dwarf, the Sun must shrink to about the size of Earth. As it shrinks, it will start spinning faster, like the spinning figure skater pulling in the arms. White dwarfs, from this line of reasoning, should rotate once or twice every minute. However, researchers have found that white dwarfs rotate at a much slower rate -- about twice per hour. Why these stars rotate so slowly still puzzles astronomers. If all of the observations from this observing run turn out okay, we'll have spectra for ten stars. Taking spectra of faint white dwarfs is a slow process, even on a 4-meter telescope. In order to measure the spectrum accurately, we must observe each star for two or three hours. The hardest part is staying awake because everything is computer controlled. Unlike the "good old cage to guide the star image along the entrance to the spectrometer, we now sit in a warm console room. Computers slew the telescope to the next object, move the dome to follow the telescope, control the CCD camera on the spectrometer, and display the CCD image. Automatic guiders relieve the astronomer of the tedium of guiding the telescope for several hours. Since computers now do most of the work, the time astronomers used to spend guiding and moving the telescope and dome is now free. On previous observing runs, I tried to read professional journals, but I found the journals to be more powerful than sleeping pills at 2 a.m. Now I mostly read fiction. I actually reel a little extraneous with the computers doing most of the work and can see the day when astronomers will routinely "observe" from their home institutions through a computer link to the observatory. Even though the job is easier, the work day is still long. This morning I got to bed about 10 a.m. through my star list for the night's objects. Before dinner at 5 p.m., I started the CCD calibration procedures because we don't want to use valuable observing time on these camera exposures. A quick dinner -- or was it breakfast? -- and I was back at the telescope as the Sun set. Astronomers don't get to move the telescope. Large telescope operators (LTOs) are assigned to assist astronomers on the large scopes at Kitt Peak. They decide if the telescope should be closed because of the weather and they move the telescope and dome for the observer. The LTOs also help with instrument and computer problems. They are an indispensable part of the observing team and often don't get the recognition they deserve for making the observing run successful. Finally deciding on a white dwarf called EG46 as the last star to observe, I hand the star's coordinates to Dave Chamberlin, my LTO this night. He types them into the telescope control computer and the 4-meter moves to the first that the star arrives almost directly on the entrance aperture of the spectrometer. Dave sets the automatic guider and I start the exposure. I don't have to make any adjustments to the spectrometer tanks to another key member of the observatory staff, Darryl Willmarth. Darryl was the support scientist assigned to help set up the instrument used during my run. He showed me how to use the spectrometer and the new computer system. These kind, helpful support scientists are often wakened by grumpy astronomers whose research is temporarily stymied by some problem. I'm thankful I haven't had to call Darryl at all during this run since the instrument has worked smoothly. I wish I could say the same about the weather. The first night of our run was cloudy and windy. Jean Nowakowski was my LTO then and she kept a watchful eye on the weather. If the humidity gets too high or the wind speed creeps over 45 miles per hour, the telescope must be closed. The wind had been brisk and close. Fortunately, the wind kept below 35 miles per hour. The wind can play interesting tricks on you around the telescopes. Somehow the one door at the base of the 4-meter building always managed to rattle just after I walked by it. At least it wasn't as eerie as the McMath solar telescope used to be before the wind screen was installed. When the wind blew across the top of the McMath, it was like air sounding an organ pipe. The telescope would moan and howl like a lost soul. Of course, the 4-meter has its own tricks. When the dome rotates, the floor trembles slightly as if a mild earthquake has struck the mountain. The telescope is mounted on a pier that is separate from the dome support, so it doesn't feel the dome movement. But unsuspecting, dozing astronomers have sometimes been awakened by the tremor. The unstable atmospheric conditions that night also affected the seeing. Star images were over 4 arcseconds in diameter. This was disastrous for the spectrometer. The already faint white dwarfs appeared more than one magnitude fainter. Also, the humid air caused clouds to form directly overhead. We fought a grim duel with the clouds, opening and closing the dome, until the clouds dispersed after midnight. Jean's job started at sunset when she first opened the dome to equalize the temperature of the air inside and outside the dome to optimize the seeing. Sunset was spectacular, thanks to the dust cloud from the Mount Pinatubo eruption. While we waited for the sky to get dark, we took some calibration frames for the CCD camera. Jean's job didn't end at sunrise, because another astronomer, Ken Hinkle, came on duty to observe for a few hours after daybreak. Jean then helped Alex Macdonald, the LTO who assisted Ken, to rotate the cage at the front end of the telescope. The cage holds two secondary mirrors back-to-back. My program uses the Cassegrain secondary because the spectrometer is mounted at the back-end of the telescope below the telescope, so the coude secondary must be used to focus light at his instrument. Ken is an infrared astronomer and was looking at IRC +10216, a carbon star that is obscured by a circumstellar shell. He aimed to find the relative abundance of hydrogen to carbon for this object. Astronomers need this ratio to estimate how much mass is lost each year by IRC +10216. Ken can observe during the day because Earth's atmosphere is relatively dark in the infrared. Jean was again my LTO on the second night. The wind and poor seeing continued, so the spectra did not look very good. I worried greatly that the entire observing run would be a wasted effort. If we didn't get data from this run, it would be several years before we again were on the 4-meter. Sometime during the night, someone called with a report of a bright meteor that had streaked across the sky. Unfortunately, we were in a closed room and didn't see anything. Alex joined morning of observing. Finally, on this last night of my run, the wind died down and the seeing got a little better. It's not great at 2 arcseconds, but one gets more light into the spectrometer and better spectra. Observing went so much better that Dave worked through his normal midnight lunch time and I skipped lunch altogether. Although many large telescopes are being built on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, Kitt Peak still has the single largest collection of telescopes in the world, with new additions planned. The University of Wisconsin, Indiana University, Yale University, and the National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO, Kitt Peak's parent organization) have joined to build the 3.5-meter WIYN telescope at the site where a 0.9-meter telescope resided or many years (bottom left of photograph on page 38). (Photograph omitted). The National Radio Astronomy Observatory operates two telescopes on a ridge to the west of the Kitt Peak observatory site. Case Western Reserve runs a Schmidt camera on the mountain, those of Steward Observatory (2.3 meters) and the Spacewatch program (0.9 meter). McGraw-Hill Observatory, operated by the University of Michigan, MIT and Dartmouth College, has 1.3-and 2.4-meter telescopes. Another branch of NOAO, the National Solar Observatory, has its McMath and vacuum telescopes on the mountain. Although originally used almost exclusively for solar observations, the McMath also has an active laboratory spectroscopy program and a vigorous nighttime stellar observing program. Astronomers currently are exploring the feasibility of upgrading the McMath's 1.5-meter optics to 4 meters. Larger mirrors would enhance solar observations in the infrared and the nighttime programs. Even the visitor center is being upgraded. Visitors may tour the observatory from 9 a.m. to 3:45 p.m. every day, except Thanksgiving Day, December 24 and 25, and New Year's Day. Be aware that the observatory is at an altitude of nearly 7,000 feet and that you'll need to walk a lot to tour the telescopes. Also note that the weather on the mountain may be considerably cooler in the visitor center to admire the basketry of the Tohono O'odham Indians, who own the land upon which the observatory sits. Now it's 6 a.m. and the end of my observing run. If this were a novel, I would be driving back to Tucson as the Sun rises. Instead, I still have several hours of work to do, copying our hard-won data to magnetic tape and making copies of the observing logbook. As the data flow silently onto the tape, I wonder whether the observing run has been a success. Unfortunately, we won't know until we analyze the data. But with any luck, we'll have gained new knowledge about the rotation of white dwarfs -- and maybe, with an extra bit of luck, we'll learn a little more about how stars evolve from giants into white dwarf.
Fuzzy little ovals. Blots of orange light. They resemble specks of one's lunch dropped accidentally onto the photo. Images of the central area of the Orion Nebula (M42) taken last December with the rejuvenated Hubble Space Telescope (HST) are not, however, plagued by defects from the darkroom or the lunch table. Instead, the fuzzy ovals are protoplanetary disks; the first **27;207;TOOLONG viewed from a distance of 1,500 light-years. Astronomers investigate the Orion Nebula and its many young stars because it is the largest and most active region of starbirth in our part of the Galaxy. The vast sheets and clouds of gas and dust comprising the Orion Nebula, visible to the naked-eye as a hazy "star" in the Sword of Orion on dark November evenings, are slowly coalescing into infant suns. The region is the richest known in stars, in fact, with more than 4,000 stars per cubic light-year packed into the center of the nebula. Because the gas-into-stars machinery is operating on such a massive scale in the Orion Nebula, the area offers the young stars and their possible planetary systems and the hot stars embedded in the nebula. But do Orion's young stars even have planets? The question feeds into age-old wonder about life on other planets. To investigate the existence of possible planetary systems in the Orion Nebula, Rice University astronomers C. Robert O'Dell and Zheng Wen (now at the University of Kentucky) began the imaging survey in 1989 that produced last December's images of protoplanetary disks, or "proplyds," as researchers call them. O'Dell examined 110 stars and found gas and dust, "the ingredients for making planets," around 56 of them. "This provides strong proof that protoplanetary disks are a common product of star formation," says O'Dell. The discovery of the protoplanetary disks meshes well with the understanding of how the solar system formed some 4.6 billion years ago. A disk similar to those we now see surrounding the new stars of Orion coalesced into the Sun's attendant debris -- the planets, comets, and asteroids. has such a large centrifugal force that it can not be funneled into the young star itself, so it remains behind to form a disk. According to O'Dell, the proplyds probably contain materials much like those in the solar nebula -- carbon, silicates, and other elements and compounds similar to those on Earth. The mass in the outer rims of the proplyds alone probably amounts to several times that of Earth. One of the most clearly visible disks measures 53 billion miles across, or 7.5 times the diameter of the solar system (see right). Seemingly supporting this observation, another, closer protoplanetary disk was observed earlier around the star Beta Pictoris and dusty disks have been spotted around Fomalhaut, Vega, and other stars. From all of this evidence, it seems clear that we are seeing solar systems in the making. No other explanation appears to be plausible. The suggested abundance of extrasolar planets, implied by the proplyds, points up the possibilities for large numbers of planets supporting living beings elsewhere' ideas on extraterrestrial life were limited to statistical shell games based on probabilities. The probabilities already indeed look good: One needs only a tiny fraction of the planets that presumably exist throughout the cosmos to meet the right conditions for huge numbers of inhabited planets. Despite the favorable odds, however, much of the hypothesizing was close to guesswork. Now that guesswork is supported even more strongly by mounting evidence that favors the existence of life throughout the cosmos. "At least half of the young stars have the potential for forming planets," says O'Dell. And a measurable fraction of those planets would have the right conditions for the formation and evolution of living beings. Proplyds are only one object being studied in the recent renaissance of stellar research centered on the Orion Nebula. Several astronomers are focusing their attention on the extremely hot and massive star Theta(1) C Orionis, the brightest star in the nebula's central star cluster called the Trapezium. This star -- visible in backyard scopes at medium power -- bathes the it with a powerful stellar wind, creating shock waves that slam into the gas and dust along their paths. We see these glowing shock fronts in large areas of the nebula like the familiar sheets and walls and small parts like the proplyds. This star, then, is instrumental in revealing the proplyds. The proplyds, in turn, tell us about the stars inside them, including their stars' radiation output and ability to regulate the way they spin. Some of these odd revelations resulted from the work of my own research group, which includes Marc Gagne of the University of Georgia and John Stauffer of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Recently we have observed the Orion Nebula with the high-resolution imager on board the ROSAT orbiting X-ray observatory. We needed the fine resolution of this combination to produce meaningful data in an area so jammed with stars. Our group detected more than 250 stellar X-ray sources in an area 25 foot square centered on the Trapezium. Most of these stars are low-mass, Sun-like stars. include the brightest beacons in the Trapezium. Not only is Theta(1) C Orionis the brightest star in the area in optical wavelengths, but it is a powerful X-ray emitter. It is an O7-type star with about 30 times more mass than the Sun and is seven times hotter, at about 40,000 K. The ROSAT observations of this star were taken over a period of 11 months, and we were startled to see that Theta(1) C Orionis changed its X-ray emission over this interval by about 50 percent. More recently a group of astronomers at the European Southern Observatory led by Otmar Stahl of the Landessternwarte Heidelberg-Konigstuhl discovered that Theta(1) C Orionis varies its hydrogen and helium emission over a period of about 15 days. Once our group became aware of this, we searched for this period in the X-ray data and found that indeed the star's X-ray output parallels its hydrogen and helium emission. Adding to the evidence, Nolan Walborn of the Space Telescope Science Institute and Joy Nichols of Computer Sciences Corporation waded back through ultraviolet spectra taken and found that the star's ultraviolet emission also varied over a roughly 15-day interval. The question then arose: Why is this powerful star varying its highly magnetized, hot star with a strong stellar wind. The star's rotation axis is tipped to our line of sight and the star's rotation causes hot spots to move into view, regularly brightening the star. If this is the case, which astronomers currently believe it to be, then all of Theta(1) C Orionis' energy output -- in visible light, X rays, and ultraviolet -- results from extended features tied to the surface of the star. Once astronomers realized Theta(1) C Orionis ionizes everything near it, they sought more details on some of the objects being ionized. For example, Guido Garay of the Universidad de Chile led a team of astronomers who discovered a number of very small radio sources in the Orion Nebula. The nature of class with an acronym based on its observational characteristics. Being an animal lover, Garay's stable of objects includes PIGs (partially ionized globules), DEERS (deeply embedded energetic radio sources), and FOXES (fluctuating optical and X-ray emitting sources)! In a follow-up project, Marcello Felli of the Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri in Florence, Italy, and his collaborators have used the Very Large Array in New Mexico to discover a number of radio sources in the Trapezium, both thermal sources and nonthermal sources. The former consist of hot gas, and the latter have electrons interacting with magnetic fields. Many of Felli's thermal sources coincide with optical stars, which are thought to be other examples of circumstellar disks. The research continues. Like O'Dell, Charles Prosser of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics has used HST to look at the Orion Nebula. With the Planetary Camera and filters that excluded light from nebulosity, Prosser and friends found more than 300 stars packed into a small volume of about 2.3 cubic light-years down to about 15 percent of the Sun's mass. They have found that 80 percent of these stars are less than a million years old. They too found a few proplyds being "lit up" by Theta(1) C Orionis. The research by Prosser has given us a penetrating look inside Orion's womb. This central area of the Trapezium has also received scrutiny in the midinfrared wavelengths of 8.8 and 11.7 microns. Tom Hayward, James Houck, and John Miles of Cornell University used the 200-inch Hale telescope on Palomar Mountain to create images that reveal dusty counterparts to objects previously seen only at optical and radio wavelengths. The images show several parabolic arcs aiming away from Theta(1) C Orionis, further evidence of the powerful stellar wind blowing from the star. The dust may have been pushed into glowing gas by Theta(1) C Orionis' wind or produced in the glowing gas clouds. The ability to separate the to components shows the value of observations in the midinfrared and the need for high-resolution observations. Another infrared study reveals other details of the mysterious cluster embedded in the Trapezium. Stauffer, along with Mark McCaughrean of the Max Planck Institut for Astronomie in Heidelberg, Germany, used the 3.5-meter telescope at Calar Alto, Spain, to survey stars near the center of the Trapezium. Stauffer and McCaughrean discovered more than 100 stars in a region only 0.3 light-year across, which yields an astonishing density of nearly 4,000 stars per cubic light-year. This survey uncovered stellar counterparts to a large number of knots of gas observed with HST and by other methods. The discovery of stars corresponding to these knots means that probably hundreds of proplyds exist in the duster, each a young star with a burgeoning solar system. Using the infrared and radio surveys and HST imagery, Stauffer has estimated and found that greater than 50 percent of the stars in the Trapezium Cluster have proplyds. Astronomers now know that protoplanetary disks exist in great numbers, at least in the Trapezium Cluster inside the Orion Nebula. That, in itself, is a tremendous confirmation an overwhelmingly large number of planetary systems must exist in the Galaxy and in other galaxies. But that's not enough for some astronomers, who want to know how the proplyds affect the stars buried inside them and their ability to radiate energy outward. Suzan Edwards of Smith College and Steve Strom of the University of Massachusetts have studied solar-type stars in the Orion Nebula. They probed the role played by a circumstellar disk in regulating the spin of the star lying inside. They studied three dozen stars and found that stars with circumstellar disks have rotation periods of more than 4 days, while stars without disks spin more rapidly. The results suggest that a star's rate of spin doesn't speed up to normal until the circumstellar disk dissipates. When the star's radiation and stellar wind drive away the material, the star "spins up" at a much faster rate of rotation. The star spins faster in part because its magnetic field rapidly decreases in strength. Such a drop ought to be discernible in X-ray X-ray energy and the intermediate mass stars, those that have spun up, producing little or no X-ray emission. That's exactly what our team sees in the record of ROSAT X-ray observations of the Orion Nebula region. Astronomers are rejoicing in the natural laboratory of the Orion Nebula, struck by the way theory and observation are coming together to show how stars are born and how they evolve toward life with a family of planets. No longer is Orion simply a beautiful light in the wintertime sky, a playland for exploring wisps and tendrils of nebulosity in the telescope. It is that, certainly. But it is also the place where we are documenting for the first time the first million years in the life of a star like our Sun. Jean-Pierre Caillault is an astronomer at the University of Georgia specializing in X-ray studies of the Orion Nebula and other star-forming regions.
The mysterious star SS Lacertae seemed to be a perfectly normal eclipsing binary for decades, until one day astronomers discovered the eclipses had ceased. // l was nothing special, just a pedestrian binary star tucked away on the outskirts of an unremarkable open star cluster. For as long as astronomers had observed this system, the two stars orbited each other with precise regularity. However, by the early 1950s, the two stars that formed this binary system appear to have gone their separate ways. This cosmic divorce came with no apparent warning - for many years the two were locked in a mutual gravitational embrace, then abruptly they were hurtling away from each other. It wasn't a messy divorce either, To most outward appearances, the two stars remain the same as they ever did, they just don't live together anymore. And just as perplexing, no one saw it coming. Astronomers have spent the last several years trying to piece together the fate of the enigmatic binary known as SS Lacertae. Several theories have come and gone, but perhaps the: An unseen interloper may have collided with SS Lac, completely disrupting the system. Stellar Eclipses The apparent catastrophic demise of the binary system belies SS Lac's earlier, more-mundane existence. A seemingly normal member of NGC 7209, a fairly sparse open star cluster lying on the western edge of the constellation Lacerta the Lizard, SS Lac's behavior raised no warning flags about what might be in store. In fact, the star appears so ordinary at first glance that no one even recognized it as a binary system until this century. It wasn't until 1921 that German astronomer Cuno Hoffmeister discovered that SS Lac varied regularly in brightness. The pattern of the variations showed the characteristic signature of an eclipsing binary, proving the dual nature of the star. In an eclipsing binary, two stars orbit each other in a plane that lies nearly edge-on as seen from Earth. Once during every orbit of the pair, the brighter star, called the primary, passes in front of the fainter secondary and blocks some the stars reach the opposite ends of their orbits, the secondary star eclipses the primary. For most of the stars' orbital period, astronomers see the combined light from both stars, but the light dims slightly when the primary blocks the secondary from view and to a greater extent when the secondary eclipses the primary. The best known eclipsing binary in the sky is Algol, the Demon Star in Perseus, whose brightness changes can be followed easily with the naked eye (see "Demon Variables," October 1992). Every 2 days, 20 hours, and 49 minutes, this 2nd-magnitude star fades by 1.2 magnitudes, dropping to just a third of its normal brightness. The secondary eclipse, with a light loss of a meager 3 percent, is much more difficult to see. Following Hoffmeister's announcement on the nature of SS Lac, other astronomers began studying the binary. Using an extensive set of photographic plates taken at the Harvard College Observatory between 1890 and 1935, Raymond Dugan and Frances Wright 14 days and 10 hours. Unlike Algol, however, the primary and secondary eclipses were nearly equal in depth - the lOth-magnitude system faded by about 0.5 magnitude, or a little over a third in brightness, during both eclipses. The equal light loss during both eclipses implied that the two stars had to have nearly identical surface temperatures. Otherwise, the system would appear dimmer when the hotter star (which emits more light from each unit of area) was blocked from view. Spectra of SS Lac showed that the two were main-sequence stars of spectral type B9, implying masses about three times that of the Sun and surface temperatures around 11,000 kelvins. Photograph Photograph LOCATE THE ENIGMATIC STAR Although SS Lacertae glows dimly at 10th magnitude, anyone with a pair of binoculars or a small telescope can glimpse it. First you need to find the open star cluster NGC 7209. Head outside in the late evening during July and look high in the northeast, where you'll find the bright beacon Deneb in Cygnus. 7209, just over the border into Lacerta. Photograph ZERO IN ON SS LACERTAE The cluster NGC 7209 contains roughly 50 stars spread over 25 arcminutes of sky, but none is as interesting as SS Lac. The former eclipsing binary appears as an inconspicuous dot (arrow) in the southwestern corner of the cluster. // Dugan and Wright also discovered that the secondary eclipse did not occur precisely halfway between primary eclipses, but instead at a phase of 0.57. This indicated that the orbits of the two stars had to be elliptical, because circular orbits would cause the secondary eclipse to occur halfway between (at a phase of 0.5). The Eclipses Stop That's the way things stood throughout the first half of the 20th century. Whenever an observer exposed a photographic plate at the time a primary or secondary eclipse was predicted, SS Lac appeared fainter. But the eclipses seem to have stopped around the middle of the century. Astronomers have observed the binary sys tern both photographically and photoelectricalthousands times in thi past bright ness at any phase. Obviously SS Lac no longer qualifies as an eclipsing binary, but could it still be a binary star? One way this could happen would be if the inclination of the system's orbit changed just enough so that eclipses no longer take place. Astronomer Thomas Lehmann has analyzed many of the old photographic observations and concludes that the eclipses ceased around 1950 after slowly decreasing in intensity for several years. He developed a model for the decreasing eclipse depth by assuming that the system's orbital inclination had been changing slowly but steadily. In this scenario, the eclipses stopped once the orbits tilted far enough that the stars passed either above or below and not directly in front of each other. Lehmann found that he could fit the observations best if the orbits were exactly edge-on around the year 1911 and the inclination changed by approximately 0.18 degree per year. This model can be tested by analyzing the spectrum of SS Lac. If the two stars still revolve around each other, their orbital motions other one moves away. These so-called radial velocities would show up in the spectrum as features that shift toward the blue or red, respectively. The radial velocities would be greatest if we viewed the system edge-on and drop to zero if the system appeared face-on. If the eclipses stopped because the binary system's orbital inclination had shifted slowly, spectra still would reveal the changing radial velocities by showing two sets of features. However, only one is seen. Second, the radial velocity of the system should vary as the two stars continue to orbit each other, yet spectra show no significant variations in the radial velocity above the uncertainties in the measurements. Both findings suggest that SS Lac is no longer a binary system. Cosmic Billiards? If not a binary, then what? The first thing to keep in mind is that both stars that belonged to the original eclipsing binary system still must be there. SS Lac now shines as brightly as the eclipsing binary did when not in eclipse, so the combined. The key difference is that those two stars no longer appear to orbit each other. Astronomers have far to go before understanding SS Lac, but they have come up with two scenarios that may help explain its unique behavior. Perhaps this was not just a binary system, but a system of three stars in orbit around one another. In that case, interactions among the trio could have caused the orbits to become suddenly chaotic, disrupting the entire system. Even more intriguing is the possibility that another member of NGC 7209 collided gravitationally with SS Lac. This inconspicuous interloper could have flung the two stars apart, throwing the entire system for a loop. And despite the cosmic chaos you might expect from such a collision, there wouldn't yet be any obvious sign that this had happened. The spectrum of SS Lac reveals only one star. That implies that the two stars must be separating perpendicularly to our line of sight or nearly so, otherwise the different radial velocities of the stars would cause two the two components should appear to separate rapidly from one another. But the cluster lies so far away, at a distance of roughly 3,000 light-years, that the motion would not yet give rise to an observable separation. After more than 40 years, however, the two stars may well be getting far enough apart to be identified by the Hubble Space Telescope's sharp eye. Until that day comes, the stars of SS Lacertae will reveal their fates only through more and better spectra. Maybe then astronomers will be able to puzzle out what happened to the mysterious eclipsing binary that in the middle of the 20th century suddenly and unexpectedly ceased to exist. // AN ECLIPSING BINARY Early this century, SS Lac dimmed 0.5 magnitude at primary eclipse, phase 0 and 1, and sec ondary eclipse, phase 0.57 (top). Now the star stays the same brightness all the time (above). Author Affiliation Stephen Schiller is a professor of physics at South Dakota State University in Brookings. He and Eugene been observing SS Lac for more than ten years in hopes of solving this puzzle. //
She has been called an angel and an archfiend. She has been credited with superhuman qualities of generosity and devotion, but she has also been charged -- in public print -- with almost every crime in the book. One writer said she was the wicked "witch woman of the West," but another said that if she "had been White and a man, she would have been president." To Delilah Beasley, she was "a modern Queen Esther" in disguise. To J. Lloyd Conrich or, rather, to some of his informants, she was "a latter-day female version of Robin Hood." To J. A. Rogers, she was "the Superwoman of the Gold Rush." To Helen Holdredge, she was a voodoo queen who possessed "the boldness of Evita Peron, the lawlessness of Lucretia Borgia, and the acumen of Hetty Green." Such, in part and in sum, are the widely varying assessments of Mary Ellen Pleasant, a bold Black pioneer who was one of the most enigmatic and mysterious women in us here, at the very beginning, are: Were these writers talking about the same woman, or were there two Mary Ellen Pleasants? And if the writers were talking about the same person, who was right? Was she a public menace or a public benefactor -- or was she both? This is a two-part essay toward an understanding of the questions and the woman. But before introducing her, we must clear up a misunderstanding. It is customary, even in sympathetic circles, to call this fascinating woman "Mammy" Pleasant. Mary Ellen Pleasant protested against this literary abomination in her lifetime, and we shall not use it here. For the best way to lose sight of the woman is to speak patronizingly of "Mammy" Pleasant. Mary Ellen Pleasant was a mother to thousands of troubled women and put-upon men and children -- but she was nobody's mammy. She was, as she told a census taker in 1890, a "capitalist" by profession, and her name was the best thing to do here is to get out of the way and let her introduce herself. Here is part of an interview she gave in 1901 when she was 87 years old and when she scarcely, reporter Isabel Fraser said, looked 50. Listen: I don't like to be called mammy by everybody. Put that down. I'm not mammy to everybody in California I got a letter today from a minister in Sacramento. It was addressed to Mammy Pleasant. I wrote back to him on his own paper that my name was Mrs. Mary E. Pleasant. I wouldn't waste any of my paper on him. The letter wasn't in the house fifteen minutes. I sent it right back to him unread. Between you and me, I don't care anything about it, but they shan't do it -- they shan't nickname me at my age. If he didn't have better sense he should have had better manners ...." This was the voice, this was the fantasy life of San Francisco for so many years. For almost 50 years, from the day of gold to the eve of the earthquake, she was a shaping, moving, energizing force at the highest levels of commerce and activity. "Black or White," one writer said, "no other woman in this State ever had the confidence of so many of its prominent men ...." For many years, another writer said, she has been "the most discussed woman in San Francisco .... She has been called a pauper, then a millionaire, a devout Catholic, a Methodist, a leader among the Baptists, the essence of truth and a perjurer, a friend of the poor, and a woman who turned every human passion and foible to her own advantage .... Mary Ellen Pleasant, for that is her correct name, has been all, and at the same time, none of these things ...." Known and yet unknown, a mystery who unfolded in the high noon of on one level, a great magician who had the rare ability to make people see what she wanted them to see or, better, what they wanted to see. It is necessary, therefore, for us to make a special effort at this point to establish a foundation of facts from which to view the fog of myths that hide her. Leaving aside for the moment the difficult question of her origin, let us note simply that almost everyone agrees that she settled in San Francisco during the Gold Rush and made a fortune by speculating in the stock market and by operating a string of ultra-fashionable boarding houses. While she was doing this with her left hand, she was supporting, with her right, the struggle for Black liberation, aiding and hiding fugitive slaves, and challenging the Jim Crow laws of California. In her spare time, she busied herself with the problems of women, supporting and sustaining a long line of Black and White protegees, matching and, some said, mismatching unattached females protegees, she was involved in numerous legal fights, including a notorious case in which a celebrated beauty named Sarah Althea Hill charged one of the richest and most powerful men in the United States -- former U.S. Sen. William Sharon -- with refusing to honor an alleged marriage contract. There are differences of emphasis here and there, but these facts are admitted by almost everyone. It is admitted also that Mary Ellen Pleasant met in the course of these activities two people who played a central role in the last phases of her life. One was Thomas Bell, a multimillionaire who was a co-founder of the first Bank of California and the Quicksilver King of the West. No one knows -- and no one will ever know -- what was the real nature of the relationship between Thomas Bell and Mary Ellen Pleasant -- was it sexual or financial, or was it both? -- but there is not the slightest question that he thought she was the best businessman he had ever met. The second person was a young Percy. She was one of Pleasant's protegees, and in 1879 she married Thomas Bell. After a few months, the bride and bridegroom settled down in a 30-room mansion that had been designed by Mary Ellen Pleasant. The Bell or, with equal truth, the Pleasant mansion was, by any standard, a strange place. Teresa Bell went her way, and Thomas Bell went his way, and Mary Ellen Pleasant mediated between them. All money matters between Thomas Bell and Mrs. Thomas Bell were handled by Mary Ellen Pleasant, who bought the groceries, hired and fired the servants, selected Mrs. Bell's dresses and decided where she could go and what she could do. It was said in some circles that Mary Pleasant was the housekeeper of the Bell family, but no one believed this, really, for she didn't act like a servant and she didn't talk like a servant. Why, then, was she there? Mary Pleasant, who was contemptuous of public opinion, seldom a judge, by way of explanation, that "Mr. Bell... knew what I was there for, and I knew what I was there for." This, of course, explained everything -- and nothing. And it explains, in part, what happened next. In their bewilderment, San Franciscans created all kinds of myths in a desperate effort to make the facts fit some recognizable pattern. It was said that Mary Ellen Pleasant dominated the Bells by voodoo, that her power stemmed from blackmail, and that she trafficked in prostitution and sold babies. At the height of the speculation, on a rainy night in October, 1892, Thomas Bell fell or jumped or was pushed from the railing of the stairs in the house that Mary Ellen Pleasant built. A coroner's jury ruled that his death was accidental, and he was buried in a grave in a plot owned by Pleasant. These, then, are the facts, and it was on the foundation of these facts that the case in essence, five charges or elements in the case: murder, blackmail, operating a house of prostitution, fraud and intimidation by the use of voodoo or, as they said, revealingly, in those days, "the black arts." Now, it is an axiom of law and forensics that you can't prove a negative. And since it is difficult to prove that Mary Ellen Pleasant, or anyone else, did not commit a certain act, the burden of proof is on the shoulders of the literary prosecution to prove by credible evidence that there is a strong reason for thinking she should have been indicted for committing certain acts. The key word in this sentence is credible, which means, in this context, documentary evidence corroborated by the testimony of at least two independent witnesses. This excludes hearsay evidence and the testimony of Mary Ellen Pleasant's enemies, and the accomplices of her enemies. And so, to the question: What is the evidence against Mary Ellen Pleasant? The clever compendium of fiction, fantasy and hearsay. What is astonishing really and worthy of long thought is that the Pleasant prosecution makes no serious effort to document its charges. There seems, in fact, to be an unspoken agreement that dead Black women have no rights reporters and writers are bound to respect. Since we are not prophets, we do not rule out the remote possibility that there is some serious evidence out there. But, if such evidence exists, no one has bothered to present it. Astonishingly enough, the principal witnesses against Mary Ellen Pleasant are a mentally disturbed White woman and a brilliant Black reporter, both of whom were engaged in a conspiracy to destroy Mary Ellen Pleasant and defame her memory. The White woman was, not surprisingly, Teresa Bell, the former protegee. In the years between 1897 and 1899, Teresa Bell made the familiar psychiatric transfer from total dependence on Mary Pleasant to total hatred of Mary Pleasant, whom she vowed to destroy, even beyond the grave. over and over again she reviles Pleasant, calling her "Black Melissy," "old she-devil," "the lyar sic of the century" -- in a diary that is one of the truly depressing documents of American historiography. "What I've seen of these maniacal rantings," J. Lloyd Conrich writes, "... is mostly worthless except as an exploration of this woman's highly confused mind .... Most of her writings are highly unreliable, being snatches and figments of her imagination, deliberate misstatements and wild dreams ...." The situation is, if anything, worse than Conrich reports. For the diaries at the San Francisco Public Library have other limitations, including the fact that several pages and parts of pages have been cut out with a razor blade or some other sharp instrument. There can be no doubt from these diaries that Teresa Bell was severely disturbed mentally. And it is not at all surprising that a San Francisco court agreed with her children, or her alleged children, who contested her hearings on this petition, attorneys for the children offered witnesses, including medical doctors, to prove three main points: 1) That Teresa Bell had hallucinations that she could float through the air and behold the bodies of the dead beneath her and that she said that she had floated over New York City; 2) That Teresa Bell had hallucinations that she could light the gas by a wave of her hand "without use of match or flame"; 3) That Teresa Bell was "a habitual paregoric drinker." Whatever the truth of these charges, it is a matter of record that a San Francisco court accepted them and ruled that Teresa Bell was mentally incompetent when she executed her will. And it is clear from all this, or it should be clear, that Teresa Bell is not a competent witness against Mary Ellen Pleasant. The same thing can be said of her chief ally, James E. Brown Jr. Teresa Bell said Brown was "as crooked as his legs." We other witnesses, including a relative, Charlotte Dennis Downs, who said that "James E. Brown Jr. was a bad and dangerous man who had a hold over Teresa Bell for she paid him $500 a month as long as he lived." (*) What did James Brown have on Teresa Bell? What did he know? This is a fascinating question, but we can not, unfortunately, pursue it here because of limitations of space and time. It is worth noting, however, that Teresa Bell later turned on Brown and attempted, according to author Helen Holdredge, to kill him. She said that "when Brown went to the Laidly street house one day, after he had been there several times to collect money, Teresa told him to hang his coat in the closet. The floor of the closet had been removed by Teresa and when he stepped inside in the dark he fell clear to the basement. He survived but was a horrible cripple ...." (*) To be to say here that this is not sufficient evidence to "convict" either Teresa Bell or James Brown. It is cited here, along with corroborating evidence, to show that neither James E. Brown Jr., nor Teresa Bell is a competent witness against Pleasant. If we eliminate -- as we must -- their testimony, and the hearsay evidence, the case against Mary Ellen Pleasant disappears into thin air. We can see this clearly if we look for a moment at the evidence in two or three areas, beginning with voodoo. It is said by certain writers that Mary Ellen Pleasant made herself the "Voodoo Queen of San Francisco," that she conducted voodoo ceremonies in her homes and in the home of Thomas Bell and that she used her voodoo skills to entice, entrap and overawe several Whites, including former Senator Sharon who died, one writer said, after she "willed him to death." What is the evidence for these charges? There is no hard evidence, which is surprising in many members of the San Francisco Black community -- some 1,800 in 1890 -- were Mary Ellen Pleasant's voodoo disciples. Surely, if this charge is true, someone could have found, over a period of 125 years, at least one or two persons who were willing to give a firsthand account of her involvement for either money or revenge. No such person is cited. We are told, to be sure, that the evidence in the Sharon trial proved that she practiced voodoo. But this is not true. In the first place, as anyone who has studied that trial knows, the Sharon case was such an orgy of perjury and counter-perjury that it can not be cited to prove anything, except that two ruthless and well-financed adversaries can buy testimony to prove anything. Secondly, the testimony in the Sharon case was to the general effect that Sarah Althea Hill, on the advice of several Black and White fortune-tellers -- some of these witnesses said later that it had proved enormously difficult to collect the used charms and voodoo dust in attempts to "steal" Sharon's love -- a charge Sarah Althea Hill indignantly denied. Surprisingly, and revealingly, the Sharon forces made only a half-hearted attempt to link Pleasant with these practices, and the attempt failed. The real source of the Queen of the Voodoo charge is neither the report of eyewitnesses, nor the Sharon trial record -- the real source is an article published in the San Francisco Chronicle on Sunday, July 9, 1899. The article was unsigned and had a big, full-page headline: THE QUEEN OF THE VOODOOS. The writer made no attempt to support the headline, merely observing, in passing, that "suspicious" articles (powdered cork dust, singed feathers, and strips of calico cloth) were found in Pleasant's rooms after she had been forced to leave the Bell/Pleasant mansion. (The source here was indisputably Teresa Bell and/or her allies.) The writer next alluded to the Sharon case and then went on to his main point that she had fraudulently appropriated the estates of several Black families. The interesting fact about this article -- a fact never before revealed -- is that it was not a regular newspaper production but a deliberate plant written or arranged by Teresa Bell's ally, James E. Brown Jr. Two days before the article appeared, Teresa Bell noted in her diary: "James E. Brown came and told me of his articles on MEP Mary Ellen Pleasant, her life and wicked ways in general." On the day the article appeared, she made another notation: "Brown's article on M E Pleasant together with a good photo of her was in the Chronicle ...." So much for the integrity of a cornerstone document of the voodoo party. So much also for the tedious and implausible voodoo stories -- stories that were created in the first place not to define Mary Ellen Pleasant but to titillate the sensibilities of readers who find it difficult to resist a good sex story seasoned with vague and apocalyptic references to "the the anti-Pleasant mythology is sex, which informs every detail and leers at the bottom of every indictment. And we must pay special attention at this point to the charge of pandering, which makes the implicit explicit, focusing and fusing the two unique elements in the Pleasant equation: the sexual image of the Black woman and the sexual appetites of a city that, in the beginning, was largely a city of men without women. With relish, and reckless abandon, writer after writer charges that Mary Ellen Pleasant took advantage of this situation and became one of San Francisco's major madams. Little or no attempt is made to sustain this charge, for even the most rabid anti-Pleasant partisan concedes that running whorehouses wasn't her style. And so, by a devious shift, which most readers miss, the writers segue into a second line of attack, saying that she either leased property to people who ran houses of prostitution or she hired madams -- Black and White -- to run houses for her. Since -- she never went near these houses. And since she was so clever, and had so much clout with officials, some of whom she was blackmailing, she was never linked -- the indictment charges -- with these houses. This is clever, very clever, and very damning, for what is happening here is that the very absence of evidence is being cited as evidence against Mary Pleasant. This is also the view of leading scholars who have examined the evidence. "Beyond conjecture," historian Jesse Warr writes, "... there is no evidence of involvement in prostitution. It is all innuendo .... Without a public confession, furtive diary entries by ex-Jezebels, court documents, or police records, insinuation is the level on which "Mammy's" connection with prostitution must always remain." And when we turn from prostitution to blackmail, when we examine the vague and constantly repeated charges that Mrs. Pleasant used information to intimidate officials and enrich her coffers, we find the same barren field of gossip was feared in San Francisco because she knew all the skeletons in the closets of the elite. That may be true, but knowing is not a crime. And there is no hard evidence that Pleasant demanded and/or received money for her silence. (She apparently made several men support their illegitimate children, but she didn't consider that a crime, and neither do I.) In fact, the evidence goes all the other way, and writer after writer, testifies that she was "as faithful a custodian of secrets as the grave itself ...." It is customary in this area, as in others, for writers to casually and positively say that Mary Ellen Pleasant was a blackmailer. And then, in almost the same sentence, they back away from the charge, softening it, qualifying it, asserting in one way or another that she never made a direct demand for money but that she sent -- not often, one writer says, but at discreet intervals -- to the houses of people who for donations to her favorite charities. This procedure -- the sleight-of-hand of the writers, not the requests for donations -- is damnable, and writers should either make specific charges and present evidence or they should stop playing with the reputation of a remarkable, though perhaps not faultless, woman. And who, pray tell, was/is faultless? It is to be observed too in this connection that some writers contend that Mrs. Pleasant organized orgies. Here again the evidence cited is gossip and hearsay. There is, for example, the remarkable testimony of William (Blind Billy) Tomlinson, who was quoted by a hearsay witness as saying that Pleasant held "terrible orgies" at one of her houses and "horrible" orgies at the Bell/Pleasant mansion. (*) Blind Billy, according to the hearsay witness, said that "as a voodoo queen, Mammy had horrible orgies in the basement at Octavia. They sang voodoo songs while Mammy stood on a box with a snake and made the calls." This citation or "virtually" blind and was accompanied almost everywhere by a police dog. This case alone should warn us that we are dealing with demonology and not reality. It is against this background, mythological in its essence, that we must view the final charge of murder. The principal witness here again is Teresa Bell, who was obsessed by death and morbid hallucinations about death. One of her wildest hallucinations was structured around the number 49. She was convinced that Mrs. Pleasant owned 49 lots in the graveyard and had already killed 48 persons. There was only one grave left, Teresa Bell believed or said she believed, and that grave was destined for her. Strangely enough, according to Teresa Bell, many of the 48 persons slain by Mrs. Pleasant had been killed at her home at 49 Clara Street and -- get this -- had been killed in their 49th year. The strongest -- and the weakest -- case in the Pleasant demonology is the case of Thomas E. Bell, who, as we the stairs of his home on October 15, 1892. At the time of his death, no one -- neither Teresa Bell, nor the Bell children, nor the San Francisco papers, nor the San Francisco police -- raised questions about possible foul play. It was, if we can credit the San Francisco Chronicle, the San Francisco Call, and the San Francisco Examiner, an open-and-shut case. All witnesses in the house at the time -- Mary Ellen Pleasant, Thomas Bell's son, Fred, and "the colored servants" -- told, the three papers said, the same story. Bell, who had been ill for some time, retired about 8:30 p.m. Pleasant and Fred Bell went to their rooms 30 minutes later. At 10:30 or thereabouts, there was a loud cry: "Where am I?" Immediately afterwards, there was a noise and sickening thud. The butler and the servants rushed to the back of the house and found Bell sprawled on the uncovered floor of above, a distance of some 20 feet. The servants ran upstairs and awakened Pleasant and Fred, and "the wild alarm," the San Francisco Examiner said, "took both to the old gentleman's sleeping room on the run." The newspaper continued: "It was not until the vacant apartment was reached that they comprehended the stammered explanations of the frightened servants, and took the right course to the bleeding and seemingly lifeless body." The veteran housekeeper detected signs of life, however, and busied herself with procuring pillows and blankets, while Fred Bell ran for Dr. R. W. Murphy, the nearest physician. Dr. P. W. Kearney of 513 Folsom Street, who has been attending Mr. Bell, was telephoned for also, and he arrived a few minutes after Dr. Murphy had the unconscious man carried back to his bedroom. "The two physicians first directed their attention to rousing Mr. Bell from his deep stupor, but all the resources at hand failed and they devoted themselves to a diagnosis but no fracture of the skull could be discovered ...." Bell did not regain consciousness and died at 1:30. The only persons present at that time, the papers said, were Fred Bell, Pleasant and the two physicians. Teresa Bell, the papers noted, was at her ranch in Sonoma County. The deputy coroner came to the house early the next morning to investigate the death. He interviewed Fred Bell, Pleasant, and the servants. Pleasant told substantially the same story she related to a reporter of the Examiner: "Mr. Bell had been ailing for about two months now, and has been in bed since last Monday. He was badly run down, the doctor said, and besides he had a trouble of the skin that just kept him in torture. Twenty minutes before 10 o'clock last night he got up without calling anyone and went to the bathroom which is close to his chamber on the upper floor .... From there he must have started to go downstairs. There are two winding and at the bottom of the top flight we found the blanket which I always left on the foot of the bed for him to throw over his shoulders when he arose in the night." Of course, we don't know just how the accident happened -- nobody knows that -- but we think Mr. Bell must have been dazed when he started down to the kitchen. I think he got to the bottom of the upper flight and then fell over the railing from the first step. There the railing is low, and it would be easy to fall from the stairs. His mind had been all right, and if there was anything the matter last night it was a sort of dazed feeling, or perhaps a nightmare that came on after he got up or while he was sleeping. Probably, or undoubtedly, I should say, it was a result of his sickness." Two days later, on October 18, an inquest was held at the Bell home. Fred Bell testified. R. W. Murphy, and "the colored servants." Although the widow was in the house, she did not testify and did not raise any questions or objections. The coroner's jury ruled that Bell's death was caused "by falling over the balustrade of his residence" and "that his death was entirely accidental." There were no further developments in the case until years later when Teresa Bell broke with Pleasant. As their relationship deteriorated, and as they vied for position in a bitter and protracted legal fight over the disposition of the Bell property, Teresa Bell began to elaborate a new and sensational story of how Pleasant pushed Thomas Bell over the railing. She claimed in a diary notation of May 7, 1899 -- seven years after the event -- that Fred Bell had changed his story and had related suspicious acts of Pleasant after the fall. Seven years later, and two years after Pleasant's death, she added the most revolting charge in the anti-Pleasant mythology, writing that two servants after his fall" after Mrs. Pleasant "had put her fingers in the hole in the top of his head and pulled out the protruding brains ...." This evidence is obviously unacceptable, not only because of the source and the lack of corroboration by other evidence, including the published reports of the doctors who said Bell died several hours later. If you reread the San Francisco Examiner report of the death, you will notice that the two doctors certified that there was "concussion of the brain... but no fracture of the skull could be discovered." If, as seems arguable, it is impossible to pull anything out of a solid skull, Teresa Bell's story is either hallucination or a cold-blooded attempt to posthumously frame Mary Ellen Pleasant for murder. This is not mere speculation. For as early as 1899 -- the year of the greening of the Mary Ellen Pleasant legend -- Teresa Bell and her co-conspirators were manipulating the San Francisco press in an ultimately successful effort to tarnish Pleasant's character. In and documents. ("JEB," Bell wrote on Sunday, August 27, "told me yesterday he had all of MEP papers and knew everything ....") In the same year, or immediately after Pleasant died in January, 1904, her diary disappeared. Then Teresa Bell gave her diaries to a San Francisco newspaperman. From 1900 until her death in 1922, Bell was indefatigable in pursuit of her dead enemy. Under these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that the anti-Pleasant mythology gained currency and was amplified in the telling. Even Blind Billy got into the act, regaling reporters with tall tales of how Mrs. Pleasant's "plaid blanket" implicated her in the murder of Thomas Bell. As the rumors proliferated, the public mind fastened on the story of the blanket, sometimes described as red, sometimes described as plaid, sometimes described as a shawl of different and contradictory colors. In a marvelous spoof of this lunacy, J. Lloyd Conrich said that in some stories the shawl or blanket and in others it was "found under Bell's body." As for Mary Ellen Pleasant, the different versions of the story placed her "at the foot of the stairs, on the second floor, the third floor and on each step in between as well as in the bed alone, with a man, with a woman, awake, asleep, nude, fully clothed, in a trance, staring into a hypnotized snake's eyes and what not." Needless to say, serious scholars discount these and other wild stories about Pleasant. Francis N. Lortie Jr., who is not by any means an ardent Pleasant partisan, says that "Helen Holdredge... accuses Mary of murdering Thomas Bell and three other men who got in her way, of being implicated in at least four other murders, and attempting twice to kill Frederick Bell, Thomas' foster son .... Miss Holdredge also maintains Mary held numerous voodoo ceremonies in order to bring the Negroes of the city under her complete control. Of credible is Mary's support of Sarah Hill during the divorce trial." (*) Where does all this leave the case against Mary Pleasant? The lack of evidence, the opinion of scholars, and the existence of a conspiracy to defame and destroy: all this argues powerfully for the view that there is no case against Mary Ellen Pleasant. The case rather is against the people who tried to steal the meaning of her life and who may have been responsible for her death. (Mrs. Fred DeLacca, granddaughter of the woman who befriended Mrs. Pleasant in her last hours, told me her grandmother believed that someone had hastened Pleasant's death by poisoning her while she lay dying in a cold and deserted flat.) As one would expect, there is considerable resistance to this view, even among people who readily concede that there is no hard evidence against Mrs. Pleasant. The temptation, even for fair men and women, even for scholars, is to say that where there is so much smoke necessarily true, for the presence of smoke is an argument either for fire or a smoke-making machine. In the second installment of this inquiry, we will deal at greater length with the smoke-making machine -- the anti-Pleasant conspiracy -- as we grapple with the difficult question of who Mary Ellen Pleasant really was. * There are no serious full-length studies of Mary Ellen Pleasant. The best assessments of this remarkable woman are in unpublished manuscripts and old newspaper articles which are, unfortunately, unavailable to the general public. An interesting and valuable preliminary study is "In Search of "Mammy" Pleasant," Jesse Warr, San Francisco African-American Historical and Cultural Society. Another interesting unpublished study is "The Mammy Pleasant Legend," J. Lloyd Conrich, California Historical Society. Conrich's study is marred by dated terminology and racial references but contains interesting comments on sources. See also Delilah Beasley's The Negro Trail Blazers of California and Sue B. Thurman's Pioneers of Negro Origin in California. The best introductions to the life Memoirs and Autobiography," The Pandex of the Press, I, January, 1902, and "Mammy Pleasant, the Woman," Isabel Fraser, San Francisco Call, December 29, 1901. This article is based primarily on contemporary reports and primary source material. An important collection of primary source material is in the hands of Mrs. Fred DeLacca, the granddaughter of Mrs. Olive Sherwood, who befriended Mrs. Pleasant in her last days. I am indebted to Mrs. DeLacca for permitting me to read this material, which is quoted here for the first time. * Helen Holdredge Collection, San Francisco Public Library. * San Francisco Black Community 1870-1899, San Francisco, R &E; Research Associates
The African Americans, which will be published this month by Viking Studio Books, is a comprehensive photographic portrait of African American achievement -- contemporary and historical. The large-format gift book was conceived by business and community leader Charles M. Collins and David Cohen, director of the best-selling Day in the Life series of photography books. Collins wanted to respond to an American media which often narrowly depicts Blacks at the extremes, as either sports heroes and entertainment superstars on the one hand, or victims and threatening characters on the other. His question was: Where are the Black doctors, lawyers, school teachers and public servants, the hardworking parents and honor students he encountered every day? A book of first-rate photo-reportage about real-world African American achievement would tell their story... but like many good ideas, it was put on the back burner. Then came the Rodney King verdict. As Los Angeles burned, the country was presented with a grim reminder of the social cost of misconceptions about the African American community. A lack of knowledge about role models and achievable goals on and violence. Ignorance on the part of other Americans led to oppression and fear. At that point, Collins and Cohen met with community leaders like National Urban League Director John Jacob and Washington attorney Vernon Jordan. Together, they identified corporations that would help bring forth a first-rate comprehensive portrait of African American achievement. These included the Anheuser-Busch Companies, AT &T,; the Coca-Cola Company and the Hilton Hotels Corporation. Leading photojournalists around the country were commissioned, and work began to spotlight Black leaders, role models and "everyday heroes." The African Americans contains a rich treasury of text and historical photographs and contemporary portraits and a stirring introduction by the noted scholar and historian John Hope Franklin. It holds a mirror to the African American community, emphasizing its significant achievements and vital role in American society. It provides a window that allows other Americans to view the Black community in all its diversity. It opens the doors of self-esteem by presenting young African Americans with positive role models and achievable possibilities. It follows Washington stop defining ourselves by our most troubled element. "FROM THE INTRODUCTION TO THE AFRICAN AMERICANS Almost a century ago, the libelous attacks against African Americans were so crude and blatant that even the most optimistic and tolerant among them seemed discouraged .... Today, the situation is different. It is not that racism has been eradicated, or that its multiple offspring of discrimination, segregation and exploitation have disappeared. It is that African Americans have learned how to better cope with the forces that operate against them, and they have learned how to turn the opposing forces into challenges that they can meet fearlessly and with confidence. Over the years, African Americans have experienced moods that almost simultaneously lifted them to the heights of optimism only to be dashed into the depths of despair. Too often that has been what the life of African Americans has been about, a kind of counterpoint that gave meaning to the realism of their sometimes desperate existence and at the same time provided some hope for the future. In 1780, the was Black. He was more bemused than outraged when, in response to his refusal to pay his taxes, the town fathers threw him into the Taunton jail. He reminded them of what they had told Britain early in the War for Independence: that taxation without representation was tyranny. Despite the implication in refusing him the franchise (that Whites regarded Cuffe as inferior), he continued his work, increased his wealth, became a philanthropist, and remained until his death a substantial benefactor of the Society of Friends. A half century later, Frederick Douglass, a fugitive from Maryland slavery who had become one of the most eloquent and effective opponents of slavery, made his own comments on the contradictory nature of American society. Speaking to a Rochester audience on Independence Day in 1862, Douglass said: "I am not included within the pale of this glorious anniversary. Your high independence only reveals the immeasurable distance between us. The blessings in which you, this day, rejoice, are not enjoyed in prosperity and independence, bequeathed by your fathers, is shared by you, not by me." It was the fate of Douglass to be remembered more than most of his contemporaries of any race because he saw so clearly the nature of our society and had the courage to speak out against its flaws. Those flaws still existed long after slavery. In 1896, a Louisiana conductor evicted Homer A. Plessy, an African American, from a train because he was riding in a coach reserved for Whites. It mattered not that Plessy had no visible signs of being an African American. The conductor knew him to be one under Louisiana law, and that was sufficient. That was the year the United States Supreme Court declared that racial segregation was legal, as long as the facilities for both races were equal. For the ensuing century, a major preoccupation of African Americans was to argue at every level of the judiciary, in every legislature and to every executive, whether mayor, governor or president, that one would be hard put to find anything with equal accommodations or facilities for African Americans. The late Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall spoke to the point of the difficulties of trying to make things work for equality when the Constitution, under which all people would have equal opportunity to function, did not guarantee a level playing field. He pointed out in 1987 that the Constitution "was defective from the start, requiring several amendments, a civil war, and momentous social transformation to attain the system of constitutional government and its respect for the individual freedoms and human rights we hold as fundamental today." The genius of the American system is that its people have seized the opportunity, from time to time, to "fix" things that the framers did not fix in Philadelphia in 1787. The result has been that new and brighter opportunities have opened up, from time to time, for those on whom the door was closed at the beginning. The genius of African Americans is that they have neither given they have not sought to make it work. With an optimism born in hope when only despair was in view, a certainty that their moral position was stronger than that of their adversaries and a determination to use all of their resources to make the system work for all peoples, they have achieved limited success. The same qualities that they have displayed up to this point are essentially the ones they need in order to achieve a status of full equality in the land that James Weldon Johnson reminded them was theirs by right of birth and by right of toil. The Midnight Basketball League has succeeded in getting young men off the streets and into the gyms in 41 cities across the country. Nelson Standifer holds a portrait of his late father, G. Van Standifer, founder of the league. Banneker High School volunteers Larry Overton and Michael cuddle a boarder baby at the Howard University Hospital Chi Eta Phi Child Care Center in Washington, D.C. On a return visit to the Vaux Middle School in Philadelphia, straight-A student Hale House founder Mother Clara Hale with two of the thousands of children she nurtured before her death, at 87, in 1992. Washington attorney and presidential advisor Vernon E. Jordan Jr. The Rev. Cecil L. Murray, pastor of Los Angeles' First African Methodist Episcopal Church, says his mission is to "take the church beyond its walls." Shirley Jackson is professor of physics at Rutgers University and the first Black woman to receive a doctorate in Physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Jessye Norman started singing in Augusta, Ga., at the age of two and was active in the children's choir at her local church. After earning a music degree from Howard University and doing graduate work at the Peabody Conservatory and the University of Michigan, she made her debut at the Berlin Opera in 1969. She made her heat-stopping initial appearance at New York's Metropolitan Opera in 1983 when she performed the role of Cassandra in Berlioz's Les Troyens. Danny Glover, who found film fame in The Color in San Francisco, run by his wife, Asake Bomani. Since 1985, he has balanced his career between blockbusters like the Lethal Weapon movies, and more serious fare such as the HBO movie Mandels, the PBS production of A Raisin in the Sun, and To Sleep With Anger (for which he was executive producer). In spite of his busy film schedule, the actor has also found time over the years to tour college campuses with Felix Justice reading from Martin Luther King's writings and Langston Hughes' poetry in An Evening with Martin and Langston. (Pictures omitted)

The Lab School of Washington gets results from learning-disabled students by using the arts as the core of its curriculum.
Imagine learning about Michelangelo by painting your own Sistine Chapel. At The Lab School of Washington in Washington, DC, ten-and eleven-year-olds not only paint ceilings, they also make frescoes and study the basic building techniques used for the great cathedrals. Students of the Renaissance illustrate their own time line with dates and events that becomes a history lesson. Later, instruction in Leonardo da Vinci's use of perspective is applied when a science class goes outside to observe nature. And for an hour a day, the kids participate in the Renaissance Club costumed as members of the Council of Florence.
The arts cross over into every area of the curriculum at this innovative institution, which was founded in 1967 by Sally L.Smith and serves learning-disabled (LD) students from kindergarten through twelfth grade, many of them placed by the public school system. Students discover through hands-on experience how knowledge of one subject relates to others. The methods used at the learning-disabled.
"Children draw and paint before they form letters," says Smith, who is also the director of the graduate program Special Education: Learning Disabilities at The American University in Washington, DC. "The arts ignite the whole learning process, especially for LD youngsters, who are unable to understand their senses. The pattern on the tablecloth and the food on their plates come through to them with equal intensity and they can't focus on either one. With their scattered attention or over-reactiveness, they need order."
At the Lab School, which also offers an evening adult-education program and a summer school, academic subjects are tackled through artistic problem solving. For example, in a sophomore math class, the structure of a tetrahedron (a polyhedron bounded by four triangular faces) might be explored by creating headgear of straws and paper clips that are then spray painted. In one of the school's clubs, models of the pyramids and Greek temples are built by eight- and nine-year-old gods who also learn about mythology and early concepts of lawmaking. While studying King Arthur and Beowulf, children in a club representing the Middle Ages produce their own Bayeux tapestry and improve their handwriting through calligraphy. The Industrialists Club enables older students to play the roles of great robber barons and inventors, and their lessons are brought to life by making everything from a model of a train and tracks to a stock-market chart.
In the arts, solutions take many forms, an approach underscored in the teaching of Elliot Eisner, a professor of education and art at Stanford University in Stanford, California. "Not all problems have a single, correct answer," Eisner says. "The arts teach that the grass is not simply green; it is lavender, gray, gold. And when it is green, its varieties are endless." Says Smith, "Through the arts, a child is helped to sort out one color, one shape, one form. Discriminating with the body, hands, part of artistic experience." Such skills assist the youngster in understanding the world.
"Someone who has difficulty expressing him- or herself can communicate clearly through at least one art form," adds Smith, who also believes that the visual and performing arts employ skills parallel to those used in everyday life. For example, she relates visual and applied art forms to specific developmental abilities: collage, for planning and for distinguishing and separating multiple elements; architecture, for its applications of math, social studies, and history as well as its attention to visual detail; puppetry, for its emphasis on language arts, social skills, and hand-eye coordination; printmaking, for developing reading readiness through left-fight orientation and for pattern recognition; and film making, for its accent on cause and effect and its attention to detail, to following a theme, and to organization.
A mural of ocean animals made of carpet remnants, Carpet Art: A Statement About Clean Water, which hangs in the school corridor artist who organized the project taught students how to make schematics, cut, organize (the pieces fit together like a puzzle), and glue. Each child did what he or she was best at.
A tour of the Lab School reveals many such examples of the students' artistic endeavors. In the library is a shelf of books constructed of handmade paper and featuring their stories and illustrations; on the window sills are sculptures of recycled plastic bottles covered with plaster-impregnated gauze; in the dance studio/concert room, the ceiling is tiled with African print patterns; and one corridor on each floor has an archaeologist's display case filled with rock and mineral specimens unearthed in the school's backyard. Smith's own office has ceiling-to-floor art work, the most imaginative being a Modern Art reading lamp a la Miro, made, of course, by a student. You don't even have to actually go into the facility to see artwork: The kids have fashioned a plywood green dragon that now stands guard on School announced that it had been endorsed by the United States Department of Education and would become part of its National Diffusion Network, a dissemination system created to improve American public and private schools by sharing successful programs. And this past summer the Lab School organized a workshop to present its methods to inner-city teachers.
Recently, twenty art instructors from around the country were invited to the school for a seminar called The Power of Art -- Educating Students With Learning Disabilities, the school's first such program. Some of the instructors were accredited teachers, some were professional artist-teachers, and one was adocent-turned-teacher. They displayed their students' quilts, self-portrait masks, ethnic puppets, sculptured animals, totempoles, and hieroglyphics created for history, writing, and science projects.
Also attending was the artist Robert Rauschenberg, who discovered his dyslexia only in adulthood. The seminar was sponsored by the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation (a similar workshop is planned for 1995), and the artist himself had been the first recipient of the. At a reception at the National Gallery of Art, Rauschenberg advised giving LD children special encouragement. He noted that reading had always been difficult for him. "I was considered slow. While my classmates were reading their textbooks, I drew in the margins," he recalled. "The possibility always exists to nourish an important new genius in learning-disabled children, if their spirit is not broken and creative dreams are allowed to develop."
The highlight of the seminar was the unveiling of a huge, two-dimensional cutout sculpture of Hanuman, the monkey god of Indian mythology who could accomplish the **27;115;TOOLONG of marine plywood and bolted to the building, the sculpture was dedicated to Rauschenberg. All the students in the school had cut out a portion, sealed it, and painted it or affixed to it Hanuman's "jewels" (bottle caps) or "armor" (aluminum or copper). They took to the idea after heating a reading of the Ramayana, an epic based on numerous Indian go on to college, and new statistics are emerging that prove children educated through the arts have higher academic scores than those who are culturally deprived. The arts provide the structure and discipline -- from the simplest form of mastery to the most complex -- that allow children to succeed, and The Lab School of Washington is a testament to how well an arts-driven curriculum can work for them, especially when they're learning-disabled.When Sally L. Smith says that "the arts are not a frill but need to be central-not peripheral-to the learning process to make a difference," it's a clarion call for school administrators everywhere.
For more information on The Lab School of Washington or the 1995 Power of Art workshop, write to the school at: 4759 Reservoir Road N.W., Washington, DC 20007; or call: (202) 965-6600.
PHOTO (COLOR): A student-made mural, constructed of multicolored carpet remnants that fit together like a puzzle, decorates a corridor in The Lab School of Washington
PHOTO ten feet in length, this Earth Quilt is from the Hamlin Robinson School of Seattle, Washington, an elementary school for creative, dyslexic children. Each student had e twelve-inch square of fabric to design and paint. Nancy Clark, an art instructor at Hamlin Robinson, displayed the quilt at the Lab School's Power of Art workshop.
PHOTO (COLOR): Stationed on the front lawn, this dragon of painted marine plywood greets visitors. Made for the school's twenty-fifth anniversary, the dragon has become the school mascot (the building itself resembles a castle).
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Robert Rauschenberg (center) and Sally L. Smith (right) unveil Hanuman, a two-dimensional wooden sculpture constructed by Lab School students.
By JO YANOW-SCHWARTZ

An arts writer, Jo Yanow-Schwartz is a former editor of Art Business News and Art Materials Trade News. Her focus lately has been on the importance of the arts in the education of children.
Section: methods &; materials
No one knows better than oil painters about the peculiarities of different white pigments. Throughout history, they have used a variety of white pigments, reflecting both cultural changes and advances in color technology. With the wide assortment of whites now available to choose from, however, many artists wonder if they're using the right white for the job. UNDERSTANDING WHITE PIGMENTS
There are only three white pigments used in manufacturing professional oil colors: flake white, titanium white, and zinc white. All of the whites you see in professional oil-color lines are made with one or a combination of these three. Each has a different mass tone (the full-strength surface color of a pigment when viewed by reflected light), tinting strength, opacity, fat content, and drying rate -- which is why each looks and performs differently. White colors are all very lean by nature. Incidentally, a color's fat content is the amount of oil it takes to sufficiently wet the pigment particles, information you need in order to paint "their degree of opacity, white remains the most opaque color in an oil painter's palette; you can't make it transparent! On the contrary, you can use flake or titanium white to turn any color opaque. Flake White
Flake white is the oldest white pigment, dating back to ancient Chinese, Egyptian, and Greek civilizations, and it was the only white pigment used by artists until the mid-nineteenth century. You may also know it as lead, Cremnitz, or silver white. Made from basic lead carbonate, the pigment has characteristics that many oil painters appreciate -- and some simply can't live without. For one, it has the warmest mass tone and a subtle yellowish undertone that becomes more apparent when you study it next to other whites or in grays made by adding black But what really sets flake white apart is its extremely workable, ropy consistency, pearly opacity, and great covering power. It's also the fastest drying of all the whites, making it a good choice so many positive attributes, it's a pity that flake white has one major flaw: It's toxic. While too dangerous to use in a water-based medium, flake white is safe in oils if you follow some precautions. Keep it away from your hands and clothing, for example, not just when it's in paint form but also when it's mixed with solvents or oils. Wearing protective gloves might be a solution. Needless to say, if you paint with children or animals around, flake white may not be the wisest choice. Brush cleaning and rag and waste disposal are complicated, and you don't want to wash the stuff down your household sink either, especially if you're on a septic system. (See "Methods &; Materials: Shades of Green -- Environmental Awareness for Artists," American Artist, January 1995.) With these constraints, you can see why so many contemporary oil painters have abandoned flake white for titanium- and zinc-white mixtures.
One manufacturer, Gamblin, a lead-free substitute for those who like the working qualities of flake white but not its toxicity. "We wanted to produce a white that would attract our customers who bought other colors but wouldn't veer from flake white," explains Robert Gamblin, the company's owner and paint maker. After running nearly a dozen test batches by several steadfast flake white users, he found the winning formula in a combination of titanium and zinc whites and an inert extender. Zinc White
Although the French discovered zinc oxide in the late 1700s, artists saw the first zinc white as a watercolor in the 1830s under the name Chinese white. It took two more decades to make the pigment suitable for use in oil colors. The most naturally translucent of the three whites, zinc white also has the coolest, cleanest mass tone and a consistency much like that of freshly whipped frosting. As a result, it mixes well with colors to produce clean tints. It's also the slowest-drying white and the least opaque. In fact, zinc white leaves a pearly, translucent film rather than the solid, opaque whiteness of either flake or titanium white. When scumbling, however, don't forget that all whites are very lean. If you're going to scumble over a glazed area, you'll need to add oil to the white or you'll violate the fat-over-lean principle and risk subsequent cracking.
Although zinc white has obvious advantages, it's not flawless. It produces a harder, more brittle paint film than the other two whites and can crack with age. Mixing it with other colors, however, increases its pliancy. Titanium White
Titanium dioxide was discovered in 1821 and became available as a pigment in 1870, but it wasn't formulated into an artists' color until 1919. Titanium white is the brightest and most opaque of the whites and has the highest tinting strength. In fact, it's so brilliant -- with a mass tone on the cool side -- that some artists find it too time, this white dries faster than zinc white but slower than flake white. Many titanium whites include a small amount of zinc white to improve the paint film and handling.
Some colors made primarily from titanium dioxide have unique names. One of these is Holbein's Ceramic White, formulated with a strontium pigment to give it qualities not found in standard titanium white. The manufacturer claims Ceramic White has more tinting strength and covering power than lead or zinc white, is more transparent and faster drying, and offers better handling than titanium white. Chroma Archival Oils' Pearl White is a transparent, iridescent white made from titanium-coat-ed mica and, according to the company, can be combined with colors -- especially transparent ones -- to obtain a metallic effect.
The underpainting whites found in several oil-color lines are basically titanium white (often with a small amount of zinc white) mixed with a metallic dryer or fast-drying alkyd resin. One manufacturer, Holbein, even calls its version Quick Drying White. These whites more flexible with age, and won't crack. You can also mix them safely with all traditional oil colors, including other whites, and they will speed drying time proportional to the mixture.
You should not use any other whites for extensive underpainting or for priming because they're generally ground with safflower oils to prevent yellowing. These whites dry very slowly. If subsequent paint layers are applied before a safflower-oil film is thoroughly dry, cracking can occur.
Hopefully, some of this information will help you assess which situations call for the use of one white over another. Unfortunately, there is simply no perfect white pigment for oil painters. While titanium white is often called the artist's all-around white, you'll get the best results by using and mixing a variety of whites to achieve different painting effects. TABLE
PHOTO (COLOR): White Still Life With Caravaggio, by Raymond Hen, 1995, oil, 48 x 52. Courtesy Forum Gallery, New York, New York. in this near-monochromic composition. He says he has always used titanium white because of its stability and opacity.
PHOTO (COLOR): Bedtime Story, by Stephen Gjertson, 1994, oil, 31 X 27. Collection Kraig and Rachel Lungstrom. "Since white is the color most often used by oil painters -- being mixed in some proportion with almost every other color," says Gjertson, "-- it's vitally important to the artist because it influences the color, value, drying rate, and texture of the entire work." Although he has used many white oil paints over the years, the artist says he has settled on two: "Winsor &; Newton's Flake White No. 1, which is a stiff lead-zinc mixture that I use for faster-drying impastos, and Grumbacher Superba White, a tittanium-zinc mixture for more general uses."
PHOTO (COLOR): Lincoln Kirstein, by Lucian Freud, 1950, oil, 19 3/4 x 15 1/2. Courtesy James Kirkman Ltd., London realists, has expressed his allegiance to Cremnitz, or flake, white, especially for painting the figure. This haunting portrait, which is nearly a grisaille, was painted early in the artist's career and has a restrained and linear quality. In his subsequent figurative and portrait work, particularly in the 1980s and 1990s, Freud allows each bristle brushstroke to build up a network of texture -- a technique that flake white is well-suited for.
PHOTO (COLOR): Waitsfield, Vermont, artist Frank Covino working on a grisaille of Leonardo'a Mona Lisa. Covino made this monochromic study in preparing for an upcoming painting trip to Paris and the Louvre with a group of his students. He believes it's critical to create an accurate record of black, white, and gray tones.
By Carmi Weingrod
Section: PASTEL PAGE
Creating large-scale pastel paintings is one of my greatest pleasures. The medium offers a fantastic intensity of color as well as the potential for developing a wide range of textures. When working on supports that are larger than the standard-size papers available at local art-supply stores, I take special consideration in choosing the right paper, handling and applying the pastel, and framing the finished piece. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PAPER
The type of paper I use is crucial to a successful painting. Some time ago, I tried stretching watercolor paper and applying various coats of gesso and pumice to create texture. Unfortunately, when I blended the whites of a snowy landscape I was working on, I noticed them turning pink. The surface was so abrasive that it had caused my hand to start bleeding. I decided at that point that I really did not want to literally put myself into my paintings. Today, I purchase pastel paper in eight-yard rolls, measure and cut the size of the piece I need, and mount it on 1/8" thick is to have the pastel paper mounted on mat board, but I personally prefer the first method. My supplier, who does the mounting for me, uses only acid-free adhesives in a dry-mounting process and takes great care to prevent indentations on the board.
Generally, the paper I use has a warm-gray tone. I work on the smoother side. Since it's mounted on Fome-Cor, the paper has a bit of spring to it when I apply pressure with the pastels. HANDLING AND APPLYING THE PASTEL
Thorough preparation is important when working on large surfaces. I stock my studio with a variety of pastels -- mostly Daler-Rowney and Sennelier -- and continually experiment with new products.
To begin, I make a very rough sketch in pastel, which I later draw over with India ink. (The ink sketch will show through the first layer of pastel.) After the ink is dry, I pick up the pastels again and work from the top of the paper to the bottom. Thisn't have to worry about contaminating it with falling dust. Sometimes I'll use a fixative to build up an area's tooth and then layer another color over it. However, I generally do not fix the finished painting. THOUGHTS ON FRAMING
Framing oversized works can be a major concern. In general, the largest glass size is about 36" x 48", although some suppliers offer larger sheets. I try to keep this limitation in mind, but one great thing about working on paper mounted on Fome-Cor is that it doesn't need a mat. Because it is sturdy I only need to put some spacers between the painting and the frame itself, so that the work is not touching the glass. As a final step before framing, I'm always careful to tap the back of the board in order to get rid of any loose pieces of pastel.
My work is rendered in a realistic style, and I strive to evoke a mood or feeling. I think the large in achieving my objectives but to my pleasure in pursuing them.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page, above: First Light, 1995, pastel, 18 x 33. Collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page, below: Our Rural Past, 1995, pastel, 18 x 26. Courtesy Big Horn Galleries, Fairfield, Connecticut.
PHOTO (COLOR): Step 1. I start by sketching very lightly in pastel. I then go over the lines with India ink.
PHOTO (COLOR): Step 2. Employing my top-to-bottom technique, I paint and finish the sky and clouds first.
PHOTO (COLOR): Step 3. I use the palm of my hand to blend large areas of pastel and my fingers to blend small areas.
PHOTO (COLOR): The completed painting: Ontario Shore, 1996, pastel, 32 x 48. Collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): This is how I set up my often step back from it to see how the composition is coming together.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Dave Beckett
By Dave Beckett

Dave Beckett is a member of the Pastel Society of America and of the Pastel Society of Canada, which has designated him a Premier Pastelist of Canada. His landscapes and still lifes are in many corporate, government, and private collections. His work is represented by Big Horn Galleries in Fairfield, Connecticut, and by numerous galleries in Canada.
Section: pastel page
For Long Island, New York, artist Jeff Webb, pastel was an inadvertent discovery. Years ago, while studying with painter Henry Hensche in Provincetown, Massachusetts, Webb ran out of funds. A fellow artist suggested he do portraits on the street to earn money, but to do this, he needed to get a permit from the town. Webb approached the local powers-that-be, where he was asked, for some reason, if he worked in pastels. Webb didn't know why he had been asked this question, but without hesitation he answered affirmatively, hurried off to buy a box of pastels, and began practicing doing portraits of as many people as he could find to sit still. Soon, he was given a spot on the street and started making money. But it wasn't until he began studying the translucent work of another street artist that he realized pastel's potential. "All of a sudden, pastels became very alive for me," he recalls.
This translucent quality still excites Webb, a traditional oil-painting technique -- making an underpainting in complementary colors. For instance, if he is painting a figure with a peach complexion, he will underpaint the skin in three values of its complement, blue. "Both colors are intense and work together to produce a muted color that is beautifully translucent," he explains. Webb continually adjusts his colors, crosshatching and layering one over another until they melt into the right hue. He does this over every area of his paintings, even the background and small details. This procedure enhances the translucent effect by creating visual color mixtures. "I'm constantly walking a tightrope to get the color I'm after," he says of the process. He goes on to compare it to cooking a stew: "You add spices until it tastes right and hope you haven't gone too far."
Over the years, Webb has developed palettes for depicting various skin tones. For instance, to paint a figure with suntanned skin, he underpaints over it with an orange-red. Next, he applies a magenta pink across the cheeks and uses violet or caput mortuum (which is similar to Mars violet) in the darker areas of the face. To create highlights, he uses a light alizarin crimson. If the color becomes too hot, he subdues it with a light, whitish viridian.
With an olive-skinned model, he makes an underpainting in a dark, cool green for the shadow areas and a warm green for the medium tones and highlights. Over this, he cross-hatches vermilion or an orange-red, allowing the greens to show through. If the red is too hot, he cools it down with a red violet. For a figure with pale, white skin, he underpaints it in blue. Over this, he then applies a light peach and, perhaps, some light cerulean blue or light vermilion. For brown skin, the artist uses a three-value underpainting of either blue, violet, or green over which he meshes their complements over purple).
Webb claims he uses as many as two dozen different colors to create certain flesh tones. However, if he knows the model's coloring before-hand, he may arrive at a sitting with as few as a dozen pastels: dark brown, sandalwood (a medium tone for light skin), or burnt sienna (a medium tone for brown skin), high-light colors, and grays and black for the background.
Webb finds creating translucent-looking hair of various colors equally challenging. In depicting blond hair, he underpaints with a lot of olive green, which he then subdues with a light dusting of burnt sienna or red iron oxide. Next, he switches to a light yellow ochre. "The inclination is to make the hair too yellow," he says. "Blond hair consists mainly of browns, with some silvers and grays. I only add yellow highlights judiciously." For dark-brown hair, he underpaints with blues and indigos, to which he adds burnt sienna. furniture.
For black hair, he uses indigo or black for the underpainting and for the highlights violet, brown, or blue. Silver highlights, he warns, can make the hair look gray. "The tendency with red hair," he cautions, "is to make it the color of Ronald McDonald's. Keep it subdued and focus on the red highlights. And for for auburn hair, an underpainting in green and violet helps to keep the color down." At times, Webb will lightly stroke the dominant color over an area and then add touches of the same color in other sections to unify the painting.
For his method to be effective, Webb emphasizes, the underpainting and the subsequent layers of pastel must be of equal intensity. And he carefully points out, he never reverts to using the local color of the skin or hair. He also warns against smudging or blending colors, which often results in dead hues. "But," he emphasizes, "colors can be beautiful and necessary. They are like pauses in music. When I deliberately want to create quiet passages, I use dead colors, such as black or charcoal gray, which absorb light rather than reflect it. They don't create vibrancy, but they fill space."
Webb has equally strong words of caution about backgrounds: "Putting them in last can cause a disaster," he warns. "You must work on the background from the beginning. And when you're painting it, imagine that it's a wall of subdued colors, not just some puffy clouds. Use the background to accentuate various parts of the figure by creating contrast. For instance, make the lightest area of a figure the focal point by setting it up against a dark background."
Looking at the paintings that hang in Webb's studio, it's easy to figure out what his favorite subject matter is: people --" something involving human figures in an environment with a challenging composition he says. The eclectic mix of antique and utilitarian furniture, as well as the Oriental rugs, that fill his studio often appear in his interior figure studies; he points out one chair -- "my favorite portrait chair," he calls it. "I also like to play with geometric shapes next to organic shapes," he explains "and I like odd and extreme perspective. I make tons of thumbnail sketches, so the composition is pretty much worked out before the model arrives. When I'm doing portraits, I focus on the character of the model. Otherwise, I use the figure as an interesting shape or form that fits into the painting."
These days, Webb says, in order to produce something good, he has to like his model. "More of the model's individuality is creeping into my work," he says. "When choosing one, I look for an interesting character, and, because I'm a social person and like to talk engaging personality. When a model is posing for me, I prefer he or she take a comfortable pose rather than one that is graceful.
"Many of my paintings include a narrative that has symbolic elements in it," he adds. "Often, they reflect my interest in history. I also like what I call anticipatory paintings,' works that capture a moment in which something is about to happen, such as Honey, I'm Home," he says. "The presence of light in the work is meaningful to me in a spiritual sense; I prefer to have natural light coming in from somewhere."
Webb has had extensive training in painting the human figure. He studied with the Russian artist Claudia Wiasigina, who was a student of the famous Russian portrait painter Valentin Serov (1865-1911). Madame Wiasigina, as she insisted upon being called, put the young Webb in a room with a skeleton and told him he had to draw it from every angle and work from a live model. Despite the fact that Madame Wiasigina was a hard taskmaster, Webb notes that she became very dear to him. Also, her influence stayed with him; when he was an undergraduate art student, he completed three semesters of dissection work in a program at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York City.
Although his students don't have the same technical training, Webb encourages them to work in the same manner he does -- without detailed preliminary drawings of the figures. He suggests they begin with loose sketches and gestural drawings. "Students shouldn't get hooked into the coloring-book school of art," he warns. "If the preliminary drawing is too successful and beautiful, the idea of painting over it will be intimidating. You'll be afraid to ruin it, and you'll end up with a colored drawing." Instead, he tells them to block in the basic forms and large masses first and then deal with the features." he says, and, likening this process to geography, he adds, "Paint the land masses, not the borders." He encourages his students to study drawing and painting simultaneously because, he notes, "a knowledge of graphics is necessary to painting -- although you can't rely on drawing skills and technique alone to create a successful work."
Not surprisingly, Webb gives as careful consideration to his equipment as he does to his techniques and subject matter. His studio is dominated by a large crank easel, which he designed and built to fit low-ceilinged rooms. Next to it is a small metal patio table that Webb finds perfect for resting his pastels on. They won't roll off, and they won't sit in their own dust because it falls through the small holes in the table onto a drop cloth on the floor. He keeps his pastels in specially designed trays that fit into an easel box. Each tray has six large sections in which colors are arranged according to he is using at the moment. The bottom of the trays have wire screens, which makes cleaning them a simple matter of running a feather duster over the top and then vacuuming the dust from below.
Webb has no one favorite paper, but he calls Canson Mi-Teintes his "meat-and-potatoes paper." He also likes Sennelier's La Carte pastel board, but he does point out that using water on it for an underpainting, as some pastelists do, dissolves the paper's textured surface. For quick sketches, he prefers St. Armand Paper Mill's Sabretooth pastel paper. Additionally, he works on pastel cloth, sanded canvas, Windberg's sanded pastel paper, and watercolor paper. He often paints a wash of watercolor paint on the watercolor paper to give it more tooth. At times, he makes his own sanded board using four-ply rag-board primed with acrylic gesso mixed with acrylic color (usually gray) to tone the ground and FF grade pumice powder for texture. If he's using a flexible
Like many pastelists, Webb begins working with hard pastels. His preferred brand is Yarka, especially the company's Sauce box set of browns and grays, which he refers to as "a great drawing tool." He tries to stay with the hard pastels as long as possible before turning to the softer ones -- Sennelier, Schmincke, and Rowney. For toning down colors, he finds vine charcoal works well.
"I buy any very dark color available," he says. "I particularly like the brownish and reddish blacks from Sennelier. But I try not to buy many of the light, so-called pastel' colors. Unfortunately, most sets come with lots of them. By adding too much white to a color, you decrease its intensity and lose the sparkle. A painting with too many lights will look meager. I prefer high-contrast colors and reserve the pale hues for accents. To get the effect of sunlight, everything else must be kept deep and dark for contrast because sunlight.
"When blocking in a painting," he adds, "keep in mind that all pastels are water-soluble and will become more so if a few drops of alcohol -- rubbing, denatured, or even gin -- are added to the water. Brush over the pastel with a bristle brush dipped in water and create a solid underpainting without filling up too much of the paper's tooth. This process works nicely with Canson Mi-Teintes paper, provided it is stretched and tacked to a board first. If the paper does buckle, spray the back lightly with water and restaple it to the board. The painting will dry as tight as a drum."
Jeff Webb brings his talent, vast knowledge, and tremendous enthusiasm to the classes he teaches at Nassau Community College in Garden City, New York, and the Art League of Long Island (formerly the Huntington Town Art League). Among the courses he teaches are traditional oil painting, drawing, art history, two-dimensional design, and in Brooklyn, New York, and two MA. degrees (one in art history and one in painting and drawing) from C. W. Post College in Greenvale, New York. A founding member of the Pastel Society of America, he has been named one of its Master Pastelists. He is represented by The Loring Gallery in Sheffield, Massachusetts.
PHOTO (COLOR): Above, left: Self-portrait, 1992, pastel, 24 x 18. All artwork this article collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page: Honey I'm Home, 1992, pastel, 36 x 24.
PHOTO (COLOR): Webb always works from life, never from photographs. This photo shows how the model posed for this composition.
Step 1. After the initial drawing was made with compressed charcoal, the artist blocked in an underpainting of blues and violets for the flesh and indigo for the hair. He then laid down the complementary colors for the flesh (a yellowish orange), right: Step 2. To create a more translucent effect, Webb did not blend the pastels but feathered them instead. The completed painting: Tones That Touch, 1996, pastel, 24 x 18.
PHOTO (COLOR): Right: As this detail of Tones That Touch shows, Webb used as many as two dozen different colors -- from ochres to greens to violets -- to create convincing flesh tones.
PHOTO (COLOR): The Cruiser, 1992, pastel, 39 x 24.
by Linda S. Price

Linda S. Price is an artist, editor, and writer who lives on Long Island, New York.
Canadian artist Alan Bateman uses layers of acrylic washes to heighten contrast and achieve stunning realism.
Alan Bateman, son of famed wildlife artist Robert Bateman, isn't certain whether he was born with talent or whether he acquired it hanging around his father's studio. Early in his career, he realized he didn't share his father's passion for painting wildlife and instead chose subject matter closer to his Nova Scotia farm home. However, he and his father do share some of the same painting techniques, including using many layers of washes.
Alan Bateman begins an acrylic painting as a series of 2" -x-3" sketches; each may take only 30 seconds. He focuses on composition and contrast and calls them "little portraits of what light is doing."
Once he's chosen the composition he feels will work best, he pencils it in lightly with graphite on a smooth piece of gessoed Masonite toned with cadmium red. (Often he'll use thread and a pen to work out vanishing points in the drawing because, as he.") Then, working flat, he picks up a fairly big brush and scrubs in the paint. "Some areas of the painting may be finished in the first 30 seconds if I scrub it in right," he notes. "In others, there may be 50 different washes. I fool around, putting on different washes until something pops out. I work out my colors on the painting itself. I keep looking and adjusting. The process involves a lot of steps forward and a lot of steps backward. I'm constantly changing tones, equalizing. And maybe, without the mistakes, it could be done with fewer layers. But all those layers build a nice quality of translucency."
Occasionally, he scrapes off a layer of paint with a razor blade. During the early stages, if he finds the initial drawing isn't right, he uses alcohol applied with a rag or sponge to dissolve the paint and graphite, a step that saves him from repeating the he thinks a painting isn't going well, he applies an overall wash of raw sienna, burnt sienna, or yellow ochre. "It gives the work a lift, a sunnier appeal, even if there's a lot of blue," he explains. "And invariably, warming it up also makes me feel better about the painting. Then I go back and make the lights and darks more crisp."
The last step in the long process of washes is a dark overall wash, then picking out the highlights. Once a painting has dried, he sprays it with a gloss varnish to counteract the tendency of dark acrylic colors to dry to a matte finish.
Although he rarely approaches a painting thinking first of his palette, Bateman definitely prefers warm colors. His palette is composed of burnt umber, ultramarine blue, Payne's gray, cadmium red medium or deep, cadmium yellow deep, Hooker's green, raw sienna, burnt sienna, and titanium white. Generally,. He squeezes his paint from the tubes into about a dozen canisters attached to his mixing palette. Between painting sessions, he places the palette on a piece of damp foam rubber and seals both in a Tupperware container.
"I definitely like something that has a bit of contrast." the artist explains. "For instance, if I'm painting a sheet on a clothesline, I exaggerate the background colors for vibrancy. I just did a painting of a pumpkin on a bench and the background, which is about 60 percent of the painting, is straight black. I like the way things seem to appear and disappear in paintings by Vermeer and Rembrandt, so in my newer works, I've been losing things in the shadows. There is always something happening in the shadows. You can't ignore them. You have to figure out what the shadow colors are and observe the reflected light bouncing into them."
Bateman starts his paintings with big, coarse brushes. As a He is a master of creating texture and will use anything, including his thumb, to move paint around and create a mark. A favorite tool is a stenciling brush with the head about the circumference of a dime. He uses it to create the short, stubby texture of grass. He also uses a cheap camel-hair brush, squashed straight down and flared out, to produce a similar effect. Another technique Bateman uses for grass is to scrub in a light green and then, when that is dry, go over it with black. While the black paint is still tacky, he takes the wooden end of a brush to scratch out blades of light green grass. The same method is used for painting wood grain in shadowed areas. It works best, he says, with contrasting colors. Other tools to achieve textural effects are a razor blade to incise white lines, sandpaper to remove paint, pencils and erasers to lift highlights out of wet washes, and small squares of dampened synthetic foam are the advantages of being Robert Bateman's son? "It's gotten me the kind of advertising you can't buy," he admits. "The Bateman name might bring people into a show, but it won't get them to pay for a painting they don't like."
Bateman is represented by the McNaught Gallery in Hamilton, Ontario; Beckett Fine Arts in Toronto; Zwickers Gallery in Halifax, Nova Scotia; and West End Gallery in Edmondton, Alberta. Mill Pond Press has published prints of two of his paintings and three of his lithographs. He can be contacted at: **29;828;TOOLONG
PHOTO (COLOR): Holly and Boat. 1988, acrylic, 19 3/4 x 31 7/8 Private Collection. Photo courtesy Mill Pond Press, Venice, Florida.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page: Low Water -- Boshkung, 1989, acrylic, 23 3/4 x 30. Private collection. Photo courtesy Mill Pond Press, Venice, Florida.
PHOTO (COLOR):, 14 x 20. Private collection.
Left: Ship's Lamp, 1990, acrylic, 18 x 24. Private collection.
PHOTO (COLOR): Below: Moving Day, 1991, acrylic, 18 x 24. Private collection.
Above: Skye and Pool, 1996, acrylic, 16 x 24. Private collection.
Right: Woodside Elm, 1993, acrylic, 14 x 18. Private collection.
PHOTO (COLOR): Below: Evening Elm Shadows, 1996, acrylic, 22 x 30. Private collection.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page, above: Bedside, 1993, acrylic, 14 x 20. Private collection.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page, below: Winter Orchard, 1993, acrylic, 12 x 18. Private collection.
BY LINDA S. PRICE

Linda S. Price is an artist, editor, and writer who lives on Long Island, New York.
From VERMEER to VUILLARD
While offering viewers privileged glimpses of the artist at work, the subject of the studio has often led artists to reflect on the essential processes and purposes of art.
The tradition of depicting the artist's workplace has ancient beginnings. Examples can be found in Egyptian tomb art, Greek vase paintings, medieval manuscripts, and bas-relief. However, the modem conception of the studio as subject -- a genre that reveals elements of the physical interior of the studio while suggesting the psychological interior of the artist -- traces its roots to the Italian Renaissance, when the studio as we know it came into existence.
In the earlier bottega ("workshop"), a bustling, semipublic commercial space, the master was simultaneously engaged in creating, teaching, and trading. The Renaissance changed this by redefining the artist's role. His most valued products were no longer merely beautiful objects, but symbolic representations of ideas: thoughts made visible.
Hidden from the workaday world, the studio gained a mystique that the bottega had never its vital significance (as well as its physical form), the studio reflected its owner's essential being and creative ability. Depicting his or her studio became the artist's invitation to the viewer to enter a privileged sanctuary. For many artists, it offered a means of expressing their most deeply held beliefs about the nature of their calling.
In 1666, Dutch artist Jan Vermeer created The Allegory of Painting (also known as The Painter and His Model as Clio), a prototype of this invitation style rendering of an artist's studio. Vermeer's painting depicts an elegantly furnished interior where an artist, seen from the back, sits at an easel painting a female model. To reveal this scene, Vermeer has pulled aside a drapery. Its heavy folds produce a deep chiaroscuro on the left side of the painting, rendering the weight and richness of the fabric nearly palpable.
This curtain defines a boundary between inside and outside space; the viewer can see into the studio but stands outside as an announcement that the tableau beyond it is a stage set or a visual narrative -- indeed, it's an allegory of painting. The model, they would assume, represents Clio, the Muse of History, whose attributes are the laurel crown of Fame, the trumpet, and a volume of Thucydides, the early Greek historian. A quick interpretation of the allegory's message is that artists can win fame and fortune (suggested by the studio's sumptuous furnishings) by taking their inspiration from history. Such a reading of the painting is in keeping with the established art theory of the time.
Yet the amused expression on the young lady's face seems to undermine this official interpretation. She is, of course, not the Muse of History, but an artist's model costumed in a slightly outlandish getup. Vermeer's artist is transforming her into a fictitious character for the edification of his viewers; but by emphasizing the model's humanity, Vermeer calls attention to the distinction between artistic illusions meaning of this great painting goes far beyond the didacticism of 17th-century art theory to encompass the essentially alchemical process by which the artist transforms the local and specific into the timeless and universal, a process that surpasses rigid aesthetic categories. Vermeer, after all, didn't achieve enduring fame by painting historical spectacles, but by his handling of light, which infuses his commonplace subjects with a sense of wonder.
Whereas Vermeer subtly questioned aesthetic hierarchies, 200 years later, French artist Gustave Courbet aggressively challenged them in L'Atelier. Conceived on the scale of monumental public art -- 12' x 20' -Courbet's self-aggrandizing depiction of his Paris atelier makes the modern artist (Courbet himself) the hero in the sort of drama previously reserved for religious and historical subjects. Crowded with more than 30 figures of humans and animals, L'Atelier resembles a scene from grand opera, its theatricality emphasized by the symmetrical arrangement of figures on either side of the central group.
Courbet shows himself wielding a brush ostentatiously before a large and a little boy look on in admiration. The groups on the right and the left represent opposing social and cultural forces, or "the people who thrive on life and those who thrive on death; it is society at its best, its worst, and its average," as the artist said. The painting's meaning remains obscure, but Courbet may have been trying to suggest that life and society are appropriate subject matter for the artist. This notion was radical at a time when many conservative critics still urged painters to stick to tried-and-true historical and mythological themes.
Courbet's realism influenced a younger generation of French naturalist painters, including Frederic Bazille, who depicted himself in his Parisian studio in 1870. In The Painter's Atelier; 9 Rue de la Condamine, six figures are arranged in casual poses around the high-ceilinged room. Bazille, the tall artist holding a palette, seems to have just stopped work and is discussing the painting on the easel with his friends Claude Monet and Auguste far left, talking to the man on the stairs, and another man plays the piano in the comer. The large, expensively framed works on the walls suggest that this studio is a place of serious artistic enterprise. Yet it's also a gathering place for male socializing, critical discussions, and music.
Bazille has dropped Courbet's obvious theatricality, yet his naturalism is carefully calculated, and his studio is as much a stage as Courbet's or Vermeer's. The side walls splay outward, creating a wide, unusually deep foreground -- roughly, the spatial characteristics of a theater stage. We have to imagine the proscenium and its curtain, raised to reveal this scene of artistic camaraderie. But the red and green armchair substitutes for a curtain, defining the field of dramatic action and separating the viewer from those inside it.
Ultimately, Bazille's rendering suggests a closed, conspiratorial group of artists who find their main support in common interests and who aren't especially welcoming to outsiders. Bazille, however, was killed in the Franco-Prussian War only a few months after he painted this work.
The spartan look of Bazille's studio was probably typical of 19th-century ateliers, especially those of younger artists who were not yet established or financially secure, but it was not the ideal. For successful mainstream artists and those who wanted to join their ranks, an elaborately decorated studio was considered necessary to convey an appropriately dignified atmosphere. The exotic bric-a-brac that went into these showplaces produced an aesthetic totality composed of expressive colors, rich textures, deep shadows, and brilliant highlights. Because these were the favorite formal qualities of 19th-century Academic painting, a studio decorated in such a fashion was both an advertisement of good taste and a well-stocked warehouse of potential subject matter.
The decorated studio found its American proponent in William Merritt Chase. In 1878, shortly after returning from Europe, Chase occupied Albert Bierstadt's former studio in the 10th Street Studios building in New York City, and over the next two example of the decorated studio in the United States.
Chase's studio was divided into two parts: a large, semipublic room (formerly the building's exhibition hall), where the artist received guests and held parties and musical entertainments; and a more intimate inner studio, reserved for family, close friends, and students, where Chase did much of his painting and teaching. His painting The Inner Studio, 10th Street reveals the functional distinction between the two. Most of the painting is taken up by an impressive array of objects in the large, outer studio, but through a doorway on the left -- again, a curtain is drawn aside -- we catch a glimpse of an artist working at her easel. Chase clearly delighted in painting the showy display, but he also suggested that the ultimate importance of the studio lay in the dedicated creation taking place in the background.
Chase closed his 10th street studio in 1895, by which time the decorated studio was becoming passe. Around 1912's studio done in the new fashion, remarked that "the rooms seemed to be stricken with poverty and so bare as to seem untenanted:" The studio's owner, noting Davis' surprise, said, "I am afraid you are one of those people who like studios filled with tapestries and armor and palms and huge, hideous chests of carved wood .... We believe in lines and subdued colors and broad, bare surfaces."
The broad, bare surfaces of 20th-century studios reflected the revolutionary aesthetic of modernism, which, seeking inspiration from the present, stripped art of all references to the past. The historical props that so enchanted Chase were swept out and a bracing plainness, as clean and well-lit as a scientific laboratory, took its place.
Henri Matisse's The Studio, Quai St. Michel expresses the modernist view at its most uncompromising. Matisse's search for "essences," as he called them, is violently reductive: Shapes are rigorously geometric, with straight lines and rectangles of the nude, the plate on the table, and the arch of the bridge seen through the studio window. Still, some casual touches breathe life into this cold realm of design. The artist's makeshift easel, an old chair with a canvas propped on it, and the painter's chair facing it lend the room a feeling of humanity.
There's also a vestige of a curtain in the elongated brown triangle and rectangle along the picture's right edge. Derived from the folds of the studio's window drapery, these shapes define the picture plane, giving a visual cue to the illusion of shallow space in the painting. Thus Matisse's studio, too, can be viewed as a stage on which the drama of artistic creation has been momentarily interrupted. Still holding her pose, the odalisque on the bed seems to be awaiting the artist's imminent return.
Modernism's puritanical zeal waned after 1920, leaving its revolution incomplete. Just as most 19th-century artists' studios failed to Chase, most 20th-century artists' studios failed to attain the stripped-down elegance of the modernist ideal. In Edouard Vuillard's Study for the Portrait of Bonnard, the painter's studio seems to have been hastily improvised, and its working conditions are far from perfect. Though Pierre Bonnard often worked in rented hotel rooms, this is his studio at Le Cannet, in Provence.
Vuillard places Bonnard's lanky figure dead center, dividing the painting in two -- the same compositional scheme used by Courbet in L'Atelier. Like Courbet, Bonnard is working on a landscape, though he lacks an easel because it was his custom to tack his canvases, unstretched, to the wall. The landscape's golden yellows outshine the pale light coming from an unseen window. Dominated by the landscape, the left side of the painting glows with energy, purpose, and concentration. The alert, expectant profile of Bonnard's dachshund mirrors that of his master, who stands transfixed, lost in contemplation of his next move.
with a clutter of objects strewn seemingly at random. Their arrangement results not from an exercise of taste, as would have been the case in Chase's studio, but from the tidal forces of utility and carelessness. Vuillard's painting beautifully expresses the shifting balance between order and chaos, a balance dictated by the competing demands of every artist's daily life.
Vuillard's portrait of Bonnard at work demonstrates that the precious victories in the struggle to make art depend, in large measure, on the ability of artists to enchant themselves, to put irrelevant distractions behind them. Often, this artistic self-enchantment takes place in studios like Bonnard's, improvised in rooms that may revert at other times to bedrooms, children's playrooms, or basements. In the final analysis, the studio is a magical space that is called into being from within. It is defined not by its furnishings or its lack of them but by the intensity of the artist's vision in the moments of creation.
Jan Vermeer as Clio, 1665-1666, oil, 47 x 39. Collection Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, Austria.
GUSTAVE COURBET L'Atelier, 1855, oil, 11 3/4 x 20. Collection Musee d'Orsay, Paris, France.
FREDERIC BAZILLE The Painter's Atelier; 9 Rue de la Condamine, 1870, oil, 38 1/2 x 50 1/2. Collection Musee d'Orsay, Paris, France.
WILLIAM MERRITT CHASE The Inner Studio, 10th Street, ca. 1880-1889, oil, 32 3/8 x 44 1/4. Collection Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, San Marino, California.
HENRI MATISSE The Studio, Quai St. Michael, 1916, oil, 57 1/2 x 45 3/4. The Phillips Collection, Washington, DC.
EDOUARD VUILLARD Study for the Portrait of Bonnard, 1930, distemper on paper, 44 7/8 x 57 1/2. Collection Musee du Petit-Palais, Paris, France.
By Joseph C. Skrapits

Joseph C. Skrapits is an artist and freelance writer who frequently contributes to American Artist Getting ready for the morning rush to the day-care center; Chicago administrative assistant Dawn Benjamin, her husband, Roy, and their 4-year-old daughter, Christine, coordinate activities. // FEW subjects fill working mothers with as much dread as child care. Words like harrowing, crazy and frightening always seem to find their way into any conversation on baby-sitting and day care. Dawn Benjamin of Chicago, whose 4-year-old daughter, Christine, has been enrolled in day care since the age of 2, knows firsthand the ordeal few mothers escape. "Sometimes it has been an experience from hell," admits the 32-year-old administrative assistant for Ernst &; Young. "When Christine was in her early 2s and 3s, a lot of people just couldn't deal with her. She would get into a lot of accidents at school and confrontations with the other kids." Benjamin recalls the anxiety she felt the first time she left her little girl at the day-care center. "I was thinking, Is she going to be okay? Are they going to treat her right?," she says. Naturally, such thoughts loom large on the horizon of a mother's psyche, especially when nightmarish news of murderous nannies, pedophilic childcare providers, and general mayhem and neglect in day-care centers dominate daytime talk-shows and nightly newscasts. "Choosing child care is one of the most difficult choices for parents these days," says Melinda Green of the Washington, D.C.-based National Black Child Development Institute, "especially because there's so much media attention given to some of the hors of child care, that parents really worly about making the wrong decision. Although Green, who serves as the national director of the African American Early Childhood Resource Center, adds that the actual incidence of abuse in child-care settings is relatively low, statistics alone won't soothe a mother's fears. What will ease some of the stress surrounding day care is becoming all informed parent and taking certain steps to make day care less of a dilemma and more of a delight for you and your children. Day Care or children are in the workforce, some out of financial necessity others for personal aspirations. In fact, Green says that 65 percent of women with children under age 5 are working mothers. Which means that somebody has to "mind the babies" in mommy's absence. But some working mothers feel guilty about leaving their children in day-care centers or with a baby sitter. They believe that they are depriving their children because they can't be with them during the day to nurture and bond with them, to watch them change and grow. Adding to this guilttrip are the ongoing studies and debates on whether children of working moms fare worse in the long run than children whose mothers stay home to raise them until they reach school age. "For a long time it was generally thought that children should be cared for by their mothers," Green says. "And I'm sure that's optimal for most. But the latest research suggests that children in child care-if it's good child care-do just as. So that argument has sort of been laid to rest." What seems to have a greater impact on children's development is not merely the number of hours a mother spends with her children, but how she spends that time. Benjamin, who works full time, says that she and her husband, Roy, a 44-year-old paralegal for Brothers &; Thompson, compensate for the time they're away from their daughter during the day by having "a good family relationship in the evening." They discuss what Christine learned in day care, and if they get a good report from her teacher, they'll have a special treat for her when they pick her up from the center. Find Child Care That Meets Your Needs. Perhaps the most stress-inducing part of the day-care dilemma is the search itself. Some mothers are lucky enough to have grannies or girlfriends who don't mind minding their children. But if you're like many women out here, your family and friends probably have their own jobs you need it. And so you find yourself enlisting outside services. Cost and convenience usually are the primary factors many mothers consider when exploring day-care options, and for good reason. Day care can become a pricey undertaking. Although day-care costs vary by region and by age of the child, the U.S. Census Bureau reports that the typical Black working mother with a child under 5 spends about $240 monthly for child care. And the location of day care also matters, since mothers need a place that's close enough to home or work in case of an emergency. Yet some mothers don't look beyond cost or location when selecting day care. Benjamin admits that she chose her daughter's first day-care center based on convenience-it was located in their apartment building. Experts say that while convenience and affordability certainly play roles in your decision, examining other, more intangible factors, such as teaching styles, methods of discipline, and the training and background of teachers and staff, can make the difference between a pleasant's needs and wants makes it easier to find day-care workers who share your philosophies on teaching and raising children. Investigate Before Handing Over Your Child. If you're looking for child care, recommendations from friends and family are good starting points. Consider using a child-care referral agency. When the day-care facility in Benjamin's apartment building closed, she enlisted the help of a referral service to ease her search for a new center. And she had a specific set of qualities she was looking for, from teachers with backgrounds in child development to a curriculum that emphasized learning as well as play. Photograph Dropping her daughter off at day-care center, Benjamin reassures a suddenly reluctant Christine. Photograph At the end of the day, Benjamin gets a big kiss from Christine. Day-care experts say parents should investigate daycare centers carefully before making a commitment and should maintain a good relationship with teachers and daycare managers. // Check out the credentials of centers and staff. Call your local bureau of licensing to find out if a check if a center observes the state or locality's health and safety standards-which you can obtain from your licensing bureau. If you're thinking of hiring a private athome sitter, always request references and call them. Talk to other parents who have children enrolled in the facility you're considering; talk to the director, teachers and staff about their background and child-care philosophies; observe a session so you can see the caregivers in action. Also, make sure the facility's operating hours fit into your schedule. Many centers will charge extra if you arrive late to pick up your child. Ask if the facility allows flextime at no, or little, additional charge for those occasions when you can't come for your child before closing time. Check out the environment. Look around. Do you like what you see? Is the vibe right? Is your child comfortable with the place, with the people? "The atmosphere should be as welcoming as possible," Green says. "There should be kids can run, jump and climb. For African-American children, it's particularly important to make sure the environment provides activities that make them ready to read and learn, and encourages their self-esteem so that they're ready for school." Maintain a Good Relationship With Your Child's Teachers. Keep the lines of communication open with the people who take care of your child. "I see a lot of parents who just drop off their children and pick them up, and do nothing else," Benjamin observes. "But my husband and I go in and talk to the teachers and ask them how Christine behaved. We let them know what we want and expect. And by doing that, things are better." Schedule regular visits to your child's day care. It doesn't hurt to drop in unannounced once in a while either, since most reputable centers will have an open-door policy and won't mind the intrusion. Above all, remember that you and the person caring for your a healthy, well-adjusted child. "The parent-caregiver relationship is important," Green says, "the child may say their first word, or take their first step, and that requires sensitivity in informing parents of these changes without making them feel guilty or jealous. The relationship should not be competitive, but cooperative." Put Your Child's Needs First and Foremost. Your child's feelings should come before any other factor in reviewing day-care options. Child experts say it's normal for kids to feel some initial apprehension about being separated from you, but it's up to you to make this transition as comfortable as possible. If your children are old enough, talk to them about their feelings. Let them know it's okay to feel a little scared, and let them know that you'll miss them, too. Reassure them that you're not abandoning them and that you love them. Emphasize the positives. Get your kids excited about day care before the first day by telling them about will meet. Take them shopping for a new outfit, a snazzy lunchbox, or a bookbag in their favorite color for their first day. And be prepared to deal with any jitters with love and a cool head. Even after day care has become a regular ritual for your children, it's still important to talk to them about their experiences. And take what they say seriously. While most children will have their days when they'd prefer your company to that of the most caring teacher or coolest classmates, pay attention to any drastic changes in behavior. Know the physical and emotional warning signs of abuse and neglect. If your child constantly tells you that she hates the place or the people, it's up to you to investigate why and take action. "The first three years of life are the most critical for overall development," Green says. "What happens during this time is very important for the rest of life. It's not just baby-sitting, so you need to time and place for them."
Section: THE Watercolor PAGE
Gesture, intuition, and passion are all experiences that I instill in my work. My paintings are large; scale is extremely important in emphasizing the big, sweeping movements I use. In some ways, the paintings are an abstraction from nature. They are not descriptive, literal, or narrative, nor do they work as a direct translation. They are visual experiences that go beyond words to create a harmony of feelings. Evoking a sense of mystery, the dark colors are rich, orchestrated, and subtle, like the dim ringing of a bell.
When I was at Millersville University in Pennsylvania, studying for a degree in art education, I painted small, abstract landscapes and flowers in watercolor, as well as large, abstract oil paintings. I continued to paint in both media for some time, loving the thick feeling of oil paint and also the flow of watercolor. However, when I was diagnosed with adult asthma and could no longer tolerate turpentine or strong solvents, I had to stop working on three -- watercolor, acrylic, and gesso -- that I now combine to create single works.
Another important realization that helped me discover my unique style occurred at a watercolor workshop I attended, when I was advised to paint on larger paper. Later, someone else commented that my paintings would read better if I worked bigger. That was all I needed for motivation. I started working in a large, elongated format and have used it ever since. The move toward experimentation was reinforced by one of my most important teachers, painter Glenn Bradshaw, who gave me the encouragement and permission to take creative risks. Having learned the fundamentals of art, I was ready to break the rules of traditional watercolor painting. My style evolved, and I found that my interest resided purely in marks and strokes, rather than in their use for representation. I wanted to find new ways to make a mark or line interesting, conveying movement and feeling. That search is still with me.
A it to do so, I start with nothing in mind. Viewing artistic expression as a process of discovery, I find out a lot about myself, and a great deal of my personality becomes embedded in my work. Customary rituals such as stuffing my apron pocket with paper towels or turning on music prepare me to paint. I don't work to music, but instead, use it as white noise to clear my mind and paint in a Zen-like state. The mood in which I try to work is best articulated by Sam Francis, who said, "Painting is the silent wildfire of Bliss."
It's difficult to describe the sequential procedure of my paintings because they don't always start the same way. For the most part, I stand at my table and work on a flat surface, which is a 22 1/2? -x-41? piece of Arches double-elephant watercolor paper. To begin, I cover the entire paper with watercolor, acrylic, and gesso. Once I get into am off and running; I can work for about three hours without a break. Because I like to work wet-in-wet there is very little, if any, fine-tuning after I finish. Making changes later is like adding too much brocade or too much trim; it disrupts the integrity of the piece. I know the additions are not made in the same feeling; they are not a product of the original mood.
I haven't always used neutral colors. A decade ago, I was very interested in vivid pigments, such as bright oranges, reds, pinks, and blues. But eventually I started adding black to my works, and as they grew darker, I became very intrigued by the effect. My palette usually includes black, raw and burnt umber, and all kinds of gray, my favorites being Davy's gray and Payne's gray. The robes of acrylics I use are Winsor &; Newton Finity, Golden, and Liquitex. For watercolors, I also prefer Winsor &; Newton, I like Liquitex Medium Viscosity Acrylics and Golden Fluid Acrylics, and for gesso, I favor Liquitex Colored Acrylic Gesso. I don't use any of the mediums available to watercolor and acrylic, except water. I use a lot of paint, and I scrape a lot off. Of the three paints I use, I probably use acrylic the most, but only because the tubes are bigger. Occasionally, I compose a painting -- about one of every 30 -- in extremely light colors as an experiment.
The surface of my paintings ranges from a very fluid state to one that is more tactile. I do not use delicate sable brushes, but 4?, 6?, or 8? bristle brushes. I don't use washes either, as I find that they create a look that is too pristine for my taste. Instead, I move a volume of paint around the paper, working over the whole surface area simultaneously because I want to establish relationships throughout the painting. Scraping evokes the movement in the painting. My scraping tools are putty knives, palette knives, a shower squeegee, and even tubes of paint. Guided by intuition, I use all my tools to manipulate the surface with fat and thin marks.
The business side of being an artist -- sending out works to competitions, to galleries, and to be framed -- leaves me with three to four days a week to paint. I create many paintings, but of course, they don't all come together. During the middle of a session, I can suddenly lose the piece I am working on. I don't always recognize that I'm straying from the work, but sometimes -- and I don't know why -- I make a mark that isn't part of the mood and doesn't fit the expression I am engaged in, and it ruins the painting. Possibly it's a matter of focus, because I am certain that when I try to fit more than one painting into a am saying in a particular painting helps the process; I know when I have said enough and where to stop naturally. The title is the last thing to come. Improvisation and the discovery of intuitive motion and rhythm play an important role in the evolution of my paintings. They bring out my subject and the aspects of my personality it touches. Red Mark, for example, was inspired by a work I saw during the 1960s at an Abstract Expressionist show at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. It had a similarly vivid red mark, which I was immediately attracted to, thinking, "How courageous." Now, 40 years later, the impression it had, which has simmered inside me all this time, surfaces. I am painting all the things that I've seen that have moved me.
I trust my intuition in painting more than I do in any other part of my life. When my painting sings, and the technique that I have created uncovers elements of myself that otherwise. Occasionally, I muse that if someone were to take a group of artists and attempt to match them with their paintings, I would not be matched with mine. The paintings I produce can inspire a sense of awe in me, because I'm a quiet person and they are so bold. Often, I see strength in my paintings that I hadn't realized was in me.
PHOTO (COLOR): Aerial, 2000, acrylic, watercolor, and gesso, 22 1/2 x 41. Private collection.
PHOTO (COLOR): Top: Red Mark, 2000, acrylic, watercolor, and gesso, 22 1/2 x 41. Collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): Above: Gray Series XXI, 2000, acrylic, watercolor, and gesso, 22 1/2 x 41. Collection the artist.
PHOTO (COLOR): Opposite page: Strata, 1998, acrylic, watercolor, and gesso, 22 1/2 x 41. Private collection.
By Carole Pickle for her artwork, most recently in exhibitions organized by the American Watercolor Society, the National Watercolor Society, and the Rocky Mountain National Watermedia Society. She is a signature member of those societies, and she is represented by Gallery A in Taos, New Mexico (www.gallerya.com) and Joyce Petter Gallery in Douglas, Michigan (**26;1063;TOOLONG).
JPC Secretary-Treasurer Eunice W. Johnson receives organization's highest Award // United Negro College Fund "A mind is a terrible thing to waste" EUNICE Walker Johnson, the secretary-treasurer of Johnson Publishing Co. and the producer-director of the Ebony Fashion Fair, received the United Negro College Fund's highest honor, the prestigious Frederick D. Patterson Award, at the organization's 57th anniversary dinner in New York City. Photograph Eunice W. Johnson, secretary-treasurer of Johnson Publishing Company and recipient of the UNCF's Frederick D. Patterson Award, and Dr. Ruth J. Simmons (above, 2nd from r.), president-elect of Brown University (her presidency begins next month) and recipient of the President's Award, are congratulated by William H. Gray III (1.), president and CEO of the UNCF, and Secretary of Education Rod Paige. Microsoft Founder Bill Gates and his wife, Melinda (left), fellow recipients of the Patterson Award, chat with Mrs. Johnson and Dr. Gray. // The Johnson Publishing Company officer and internationally known fashion arbiter was honored for her commitment to higher education and Fashion Fair, she has raised more than $48 million for the college fund and other Black charities. Also honored at the dinner, which was attended by Secretary of Education Rod Paige and major educators and leaders from across the nation, were Microsoft Founder Bill Gates and his wife, Melinda Gates, cofounders of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, who also received the Frederick D. Patterson Award. Responding to the honor, Mrs. Johnson expressed her gratitude and stressed her commitment to the UNCF and education. "Education," she said, "means the world to me. I believe that success in life begins with a good education. To receive the Frederick D. Patterson Award from the United Negro College Fund, an organization that I have loved and supported throughout the years, is quite tremendous." She said the award honored "more than me, you have also honored my husband, John H. Johnson, our daughter, Linda Johnson Rice, the educators in my family who have gone before me, the Johnson Publishing Company family throughout the United States, Africa, the Caribbean and Europe." Mrs. Johnson recalled her family's commitment to education. "You might say that I inherited my thirst for education. My grandfather, Dr. William H. McAlpine, was the founder of Selma University, of course, a UNCF school. My grandfather had a burning desire to educate and help others." Photograph Accepting the award, Mrs. Johnson (top) emphasized her commitment to higher education and the UNCF's mission. Linda Johnson Rice, president and COO of Johnson Publishing Company, discussed the event with Sanford I. Weill (above, 1.), dinner chairman and chairman and CEO of Citigroup Inc., and Mel Farr Sr., CEO of Mel Farr Automotive Group. Photograph Chairman of the UNCF board, Michael H. Jordon, retired chairman and CEO of CBS Corporation, was cited (left) by UNCF President Gray. Other honorees included George L. Davis (below, left), dean emeritus of University College Award; and Emmit McHenry (below, right), who received a special presentation of a President's Award for his support of the UNCF Technology Enhancement Capital Campaign. // She said her parents continued this tradition. "My father, Dr. Nathaniel D. Walker, always said that if you want to make a difference in this world, you must first get an education. I learned the value of education through his life because he worked after school and paid his way through Talladega College. He also paid his way through medical school at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina." Her mother, she said, was equally committed to education. "My mother, Mrs. Ethel McAlpine Walker, was the principal of the high school and taught education and art at the college level at Selma University. I went to Talladega, my father's alma mater, because I was, frankly, a daddy's girl. My sister, who became a Ph.D. professor at Providence College in Providence,'s alma mater. I had two brothers who became physicians and practiced medicine in Chicago and Los Angeles. So, you can see, mine is a family with a history of a love for education and UNCF schools." This tradition, she said, continues today.  "This love for education was passed on to my own daughter, who was reading everything in sight at the age of 2. My daughter, in turn, has passed on the love of reading and learning to my 12-year-old granddaughter." In conclusion, she called for a continuing crusade to provide the best education for America's children. "Like those before me, I have a burning desire to educate. I feel strongly that all children should be able to read at a very early age... I would like to see all young people get the greatest education they canpreferably from a UNCF school! I would actually love to see all young people stay in school until they receive their Ph.D." The Frederick D. Patterson found the United Negro College Fund in 1944. Other honorees included Dr. Ruth J. Simmons, president-elect of Brown University, and Emmit McHenry, founder, chairman and CEO of NetCom Solutions, International, Inc., both of whom received the President's Award. The distinguished Alumni Award was given to George L. Davis, Dean Emeritus of University College, Rutgers University-Newark campus. The Fund also honored the TECC Builders Circle, which consists of corporations and foundations that have contributed $500,000 and above and individuals who have contributed $20,000 and above to UNCF Technology Enhancement Capital Campaign. Distinguished leaders honored were Michael H. Jordan, chair of the UNCF Board and retired chairman and CEO of CBS Corporation; Alfred G. Goldstein, member UNCF Board of Directors and president and CEO, A.G. Associates; and Jack L. Stahl, a member of the UNCF board and former president and COO, The Coca-Cola Company. The Fund honored three corporations-Microsoft, AT &T; and Lockheed Martin-and five foundations, the Starr Foundation, Houston Endowment, the Annenberg Foundation,

Milt Kobayashi grants students permission to take complete control of their paintings and not feel obligated to paint exactly what they see. During a recent workshop, he encouraged participants to change a model's pose, coloration, and costumes to suit their own ideas.
Milt Kobayashi, a New York artist known for his intriguing depictions of women, teaches painting from a unique and refreshing perspective.
His classes are more about learning to be open to possibilities and less about finishing the week with a new list of artistic dos and don'ts. As one student said in summing up Kobayashi's teaching approach, "He gives us permission to trust ourselves."
Artists who recently participated in one of Kobayashi's workshops at the Scottsdale Artists' School discovered that it isn't easy to make painting decisions based on personal taste rather than observation. In fact, doing what you want is a learned process. The learning took place during each of the five days of the workshop, with the mornings devoted to a three-hour demonstration by Kobayashi, during which he that I'd like to learn from Sargent," he explained. "I'd want Sargent to paint and not just talk about it. I'd figure out what he's doing myself."
Although Kobayashi is short on words about his philosophy of art, he offers students plenty of opportunities, through observation, to catch on to his style of painting.
He also gives clues about his process in the way he answers questions. Asked about a particular mixture of colors that was a favorite in a previous workshop he replies, "Oh, I don't do that anymore." When a student wanted to pin him down on the way he establishes shadows or paints hands, he gave answers such as, "It keeps changing," or "I normally do that, but not today." Students came to under stand they should stay in the present, trust what they see, and take artistic control of their work.
Kobayashi releases students to explore and invent in in the 1960s placed the painting process above subject matter. The actual subject -- the model wearing a particular outfit and positioned in a certain pose -- was only a starting point. How the painting developed was based on what the artist saw on his or her canvas. About painting the figure, he said, "Paint what you think it should look like."
Day one of the workshop started off with Kobayashi greeting what felt like a small crowd of adoring fans. (The class of i8 filled in the first 45 minutes after registration opened.) Several of the students have been attending his workshops for a decade or more. The seasoned friendships Kobayashi has with many soon became evident as the room filled with laughter and chat. One student asked, "Are you going to tell us about any new secret colors you're using?" He immediately came back with, "If I knew, I wouldn't be telling you." This was said with a sly smile, as He made himself and his instruction accessible, making the participants feel as if they were learning from a very well-informed friend.
All of Kobayashi's demonstrations took place at one end of a long, ample studio. The model took her place in an ordinary white plastic chair set on a low platform. To begin, Kobayashi toned an 11? -x-14? canvas-covered board with a mixture of dark green and ochre pigment mixed with some paint thinner and linseed oil. He applied quick, firm strokes, blended them, and tried various compositions by drawing a basic head-and-shoulder outline. He warned students to make sure the head was not aligned with the torso because that would be "way too stiff," but to tilt it instead. He also tried to create variety within the pose. "In any pose, there is an active and an inactive side. I make one side very straight and the other crooked for counterpoint."
Next he positioned the model to match what he'd drawn. her gaze. "This is how I work," he explained. "I start with an idea of how I want the painting, and then I have the model sit that way." At this stage of the initial drawing, he also began to establish the position of the hands, indicating them with simple rectangles. He tried out several positions, somewhat arbitrary in terms of anatomy and the pose of the model, but important in terms of design. He stepped back from the canvas frequently to assess the composition, then he adjusted the placement and angle of the elements, repositioning for flow, until he was satisfied.
To define the shape of the head, Kobayashi drew a circle for the upper skull, and then added a sort of triangle with a fiat tip -- a muzzle shape for the front of the face. If the placement hadn't appeared correct, the artist could move these briefly noted forms. He finished planning the face by indicating the eyes along the arc went at the tip of the triangle, and below it he drew a projecting cylinder that defined the chin.
Kobayashi credits George B. Bridgman, a renowned instructor of anatomy at The Art Students League of New York, in Manhattan, for more than 50 years, for this approach to drawing the figure in which the human form is reduced to blocks wedged into other blocks. "His method was simple and easy, and the blocks showed the direction of the different elements of the body," he explained. "This approach lets you get the skeleton right without worrying too much about the muscles -- which works for my kind of painting." Kobayashi recommended that students purchase copies of Bridgman's books for reference: Bridgman's Complete Guide to Drawing From Life (Sterling Publications, New York, New York); Heads, Figures and Faces (Dover Publications, Mineola, New York); Constructive Anatomy (Dover Publications, Mineola, New York).
 "Sometimes the pose I want" I think this comes from my earlier years of cartooning, putting figures in odd positions. "To overcome this problem of having a model hold an awkward pose, Kobayashi often works from Polaroid photographs of the model.
"Before I get into too much drawing, I like to paint the masses so I can see where the painting is going," Kobayashi explained as he continued the demonstration. He used a No. 4 filbert brush and his standard palette of earth tones, including a mother color such as black or a premixed warm gray, but no cadmiums and rarely white. He also favors Mars series colors but, beyond this, he does not give students a set palette of specific pigments because his favorites keep changing. Using yellow ochre, he outlined the head with strokes of varying width to convey form and dabbed in values for the eyes, nose, mouth, and ears. He stopped a moment to assure the students that they could play with the placement of features. "to do is convince the viewer the painting is right." He then slathered on a wild mass of hair. As he painted, Kobayashi commented, "I try to paint hair fast and loose because hair is loose. I remind myself of the kind of material I am painting so the brushstrokes express that."
Kobayashi may also change the color of the hair. In this demonstration, he painted the hair with Mars black because "it dries really black." Black is an essential part of Kobayashi's palette, in the tradition of artists such as Degas, Manet, and Velzquez. In general, he prefers ivory black rather than coal blacks, and when he wants hair to look very black he adds some ultramarine blue.
Next he tackled the flesh tones of the face and neck, using notably muddy colors, which are part of his signature style. He may start with Mars violet or Mars yellow, or a warm monochrome by Holbein. If some black pigment left the other colors, all the better. "For me there is something wrong with fleshy, Band-Aid colors and rouge cheeks," Kobayashi commented. "They throw me off track, and the painting starts to head in a more conventional direction instead of being a Kobayashi. I feel freer when I use unusual colors." As he answered a student's question about the specific pigments used for the face, he revealed the fun he has in being unconventional. "I'm planning on a gray, ugly skin tone -- very dead looking."
He blocked in the shadow of the eye socket next, followed by the color on the ridge of the nose and the shadow under the lip and on the neck. He mixed blue, burnt sienna, and a yellowish white for these. He also currently likes Holbein's Mars orange because "it's not too brown. It warms up a light blue and makes a great shadow tone." Next he filled in the exposed part of value since this part of the body usually receives less sun than the face. For Kobayashi, value is more important than color. "Value grounds your painting. You can then use any color you want."
He turned his attention again to the hands, having the model try different positions. "I'm like a director. I take a lot of time posing the hands so they're not clenched or have too geometric a shape. Bend the wrist a little or it will be too straight and look like a log. Think of how dancers hold their hands in positions that give movement to the form. I want them placed gracefully." He takes Polaroid photographs of the model's hands and uses them to lay in the basic planes. Although he makes the hands big, he likes to paint the arms skinny to give more action to his paintings and to lead the viewer's eye out and into the picture. His arms are tube-like except when they rest on a chair opportunity for creating a soft edge and an interesting shape.
Kobayashi proceeded by covering the canvas, laying in all values and shapes. "At this point, I want to know how every thing relates," he explained. He next asked the students to decide what color to make the model's blouse. He suggested a cool color so the color of the face wouldn't look drab. The students decided on lavender, and Kobayashi mixed a periwinkle from a combination of violet gray and rose. He then covered the background with a warm beige using a No. 8 brush and a palette knife, cutting into the hair form with the background paint. He kept this color light to maintain the silhouette of the figure. The artist says he avoids blue for the background because it looks too much like the sky.
Throughout this lay-in, Kobayashi's brushstrokes were assured and harmonious. In relation to this, the artist had a fascinating tip for his students: "There is a rhythm to and the size of the containers you use to hold your solvent and pigments can affect this," he advised. "Use big containers to make big strokes. I keep brushes in a coffee can that holds paint thinner and use a tuna can with the lid removed for the linseed oil. Larger containers allow me to swish the brush around freely. It's a continuous-flow thing. I don't use those tiny cups they sell for holding oil. Making a little dip with a brush into one of those and then a big stroke on the canvas is a different rhythm."
With the lay-in completed, Kobayashi finished stage one of his painting process in little more than an hour. "Stage two involves cleaning up the drawing," he explained. Painting wet-in-wet, he worked on the face again. "Now I'm redrawing it for me." He altered the values, added some Mars violet to the cheeks, and emphasized the projection of the nose.
During stage two serious painting." Students got a close look through the binoculars they were asked to bring with their painting supplies. He added some light to the darker side of the face because, as he explained, "this side curves into the light," and added a shadow to the lighter side to bright en it. Next he focused on the mouth, carving the edge with the adjacent flesh tone. He detailed the hands. "I think of the three middle fingers of the hand as a wedge with the pinky and thumb more like accents," he commented. "These give expression to the hand." He painted thick, black lines between the fingers to define them. He also noted a color change at the wrist bone and painted one plane a deep rose. But the hands were still flat and stylized, reminiscent of the graphic hands of Viennese Expressionist Gustav Klimt.
At this point Kobayashi considered adding a pattern to the figure's blouse. True to the freedom he allows patches of color or stripes. By now the personality of the figure was emerging. When a student asked him who the women in his paintings are and if they have a message, Kobayashi answered matter-of-factly, "I'm a big believer in 'it is what it is.' This is just the way I paint women. I can't explain it."
Kobayashi worked on more detail as he moved on to stage three. He decided where to place the pupil of the eye -- 1 o'clock and high to open the eye -- and, to give some texture to the pupil, he recommended using a viscous handmade paint such as Doak or Harding and dipping the tip of the brush into the pigment. Next, he adjusted the lashes and eyebrows and added to the mouth -- the most expressive part of the face because it's always changing. "At this stage I also check how one stroke works with another. I want the surface to look attractive." He describes his with a fuller face.
After a break for lunch, workshop participants returned to the studio to discover three models posing in various areas of the room. They began painting the women, and Kobayashi toured the room complimenting a good shape, the graphic flatness of a design, or the handling of color. He explained that he would speak loudly when criticizing each person's painting so those facing similar problems could benefit from his feedback. A student was having trouble with the pink of a satin dress one of the models was wearing, so Kobayashi showed her a reproduction of a Sargent painting in which he had handled satin. Then he helped the student find the basic color of the fabric the class model was wearing and painted that first before adding shadow and highlight colors. He also recalled the time he scanned a Sargent figurative painting into his computer and digitally erased the few darkest areas and highlights to discover that the master had relied mostly on just two values to portray the form.
For another in the model's hair to complement the background the student had painted. As the afternoon proceeded, everyone was engrossed in their work. Painting suddenly felt fun as Kobayashi broke the students free from the model study and encouraged them to create their own original paintings.
Over the course of the workshop, Kobayashi built a warm rapport with his students. On the final day someone brought a cobbler and ice cream to share, and Kobayashi gave the students hugs before they went on their way. Kobayashi's Painting Tips
* If you're having difficulty with a passage, switch to a bigger brush. Students usually pick up a smaller brush to fix something, but then they are more likely to start obsessing.
* Painting square or rectangular necklines makes it easier to give direction to the torso.
* Make sure the horizontal line running through the eyes is not at an exact right angle to the vertical line of the nose. If you photograph a head straight-on and then tip the photograph paint something that looks like a mannequin, not a real person. You'll see this done the right way in William Merritt Chase's and Velzquez's figures.
* Stay simple when you're doing a portrait, and don't put in too many planes. You'll lose the likeness and make the person look older.
* To paint eyebrows, either use a grayish color and make a big, thick stroke, adding a few details of hair or, if the brow is very black, make a thinner stroke.
* Try to become what you're painting. Get into it. It's OK to make noises the way a boy does when he's playing with a plane or a car. Kobayashi's Work
Cat Eyes 2003, oil, 8 x 8. Private collection.
Bare Shoulders 2004, oil, 8 x 8. Private collection.
Black Top 2002, oil, 12 x 8. Private collection.
Black and White 2003, oil Red Screen 2005, oil, 25 x 25. Private collection.
Less Time Spent 2004, oil, 18 x 18. Private collection.
Stretch and Relax (Two Ballerinas) 2004, oil, 26 x 24. Private collection.
Love and Japanese Prints 2004, oil, 16 x 20. Private collection. Student Work
Kobayashi avoids any formal critique of student work because in class there is not enough time to bring paintings to completion, and he feels judging them would be premature. However, over the years, Kobayashi has seen one mistake most students make: they are afraid to use darks and start their paintings with a middle tone that makes their work appear muddy. About the Artist
Milt Kobayashi was born in New York City, a third-generation Japanese-American, but he spent his early childhood in Oahu, Hawaii, and then Los Angeles. He earned a B.A. from the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1970, and soon began working as an illustrator. commercial art market, and he returned to New York in 1977.
Here, on a visit to The Metropolitan Museum of Art, in New York City, he was so struck by a painting by Velzquez, the portrait Juan de Pareja, that his career took a major shift toward fine art. Kobayashi began studying the work of Whistler, Chase, and Sargent -- all artists also influenced by Velzquez. Subsequently, Japanese art also became an inspiration for Kobayashi, in particular the 16th- and 17th-century Japanese Ukiyo-e woodblock print masters, such as Hokusai, Sharaku, and Utamaro.
Kobayashi has received two major awards: the National Academy of Design Ranger Purchase Award and the Allied Arts Silver Medal.
PHOTO (COLOR): Kobayashi helped a student strengthen her figure painting.
PHOTO (COLOR): Many of the students (and their pets) had attended previous workshops with Kobayashi and were familiar with his approach.
PHOTO (COLOR): OPPOSITE PAGE: Kobayashi took a Polaroid photograph but he made radical changes in the woman's pose, coloration, and features as he worked.
PHOTO (COLOR): LEFT: Kobayashi's preliminary drawing on the canvas.
PHOTO (COLOR): ABOVE: The artist's palette, large brushes, and painting medium.
PHOTO (COLOR): The various preliminary stages of Kobayashi's painting demonstration.
PHOTO (COLOR): Although Kobayashi indicated he would not talk while he was painting, he answered the students' questions when the model took breaks.
PHOTO (COLOR): OPPOSITE PAGE: Once satisfied with his composition, Kobayashi developed the painting of the model's head.
PHOTO (COLOR): ABOVE LEFT: As he turned his attention to the woman's dress, his primary concern was the relative values of each color.
PHOTO (COLOR): ABOVE RIGHT: The demonstration as it neared completion.
PHOTO (COLOR): LEFT: Kobayashi's setup.
PHOTO (COLOR)
By Molly Siple

Molly Siple frequently writes about art from her hometown of Los Angeles and is an artist-member of the California Art Club. See her other article in this issue on Ken Backhaus.
About the Scottsdale Artists' School
Located in the heart of Scottsdale, Arizona, the Scottsdale Artists' School is housed in a historic 1928 schoolhouse designed in a style reminiscent of a sprawling hacienda. From its red-tile roof, the rows of huge arched windows that line the hallways, and the original Mexican saltillo-tile floor, there's plenty of atmosphere to inspire the artist. In addition, original artwork by the school's changing roster of nationally recognized instructors fills the hallway walls. The classrooms are large with high ceilings and good natural light; and an exceptionally professional and cordial staff manages the daily activities. The school is open for classes from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday as well as Saturday from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. For a small fee, there is also 9:30 p.m.
Starting next January, the school promises to be even more charming, when the first rose bushes will be planted on the grounds (sponsored by the City of Scottsdale and the Scottsdale Rose Society). There will be themed areas of special types of roses, rose trellises, paths, and reserved painting areas for artists.
A wide range of accommodations and eateries is nearby, and the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport is less than 20 minutes away by cab. For more information about the school and its programs, visit **27;2222;TOOLONG.
A personal overview of American mystery fiction
It was in the eleventh grade that I knew I would be a writer. The conviction grew out of two awarenesses that dawned at about the same time. I became aware of the world of realistic adult fiction, with all its power to inform and enchant and absorb one utterly. I became aware, too, of my own talent with words. I seemed to be capable of doing with them what I had been unable to (lo with a baseball bat or a hammer or a monkey wrench or a slide rule.
And so I wrote-poems, sketches, stories, the usual juvenilia. Artistically, my childhood had been one of deprivation, in that I was not the product of a dysfunctional family. Accordingly, the things I wrote derived less from experience and inner turmoil than from other writings that I admired.
During my freshman year at Antioch I sent what I wrote to various magazines, and they sent it back. I was not greatly dismayed. I mounted the rejection slips on suppose I was proud of them, and perhaps I was right to be. I was, after all, actively engaged in the process of becoming a writer, and they were evidence of that engagement.
I read all the time, and one of the many things I read, the summer after my first year at college, was The Jungle Kids, a paperback collection of short stories by Evan Hunter. A couple of years previously Hunter had hit the best-seller list with The Blackboard Jungle, and the stories were all about what were then called juvenile delinquents. (I don't know what you'd call them now. Kids, I guess.)
There were some fine stories in The Jungle Kids, including a positively Chekhovian tour de force called "The Last Spin," in which two rival gang leaders become friends in the course of a game of Russian roulette. There were other stories that were less remarkable, just good workmanlike efforts. But the book had a profound effect once estimable and attainable. I sensed that I could do what he had done here, and that it was worth the doing. I couldn't write these stories, but I could write stories that were good in the way in which these stories were good.
I sat down at once and tried writing a story about juvenile delinquents, and it was awful, and I left it unfinished. And then some months later I was living in New York and working in a publisher's mail room, and one Sunday afternoon I wrote a short story about a young man in New York who lived by his wits, making ends meet through petty theft and mail fraud. I didn't send it anywhere because I couldn't think where to send it, but eventually I recalled that Evan Hunter had published in a magazine called Manhunt, so I mailed my story off to it. The editor asked for a rewrite, complaining that my ending was inconclusive. I rewrote it and it came right back' 57, I actually bought a copy of Manhunt and read everything in it and saw how to fix my story. I sent it off again, and damned if the magazine didn't buy it. Paid me a hundred bucks for it too.
And so my fate was sealed. For the past thirty-some years I've been writing crime fiction.
Imagine if my first sale had been to "Heloise's Household Hints" ...
Poe started it. "The Murders in the Rue Morgue" is the first detective story, C. Auguste Dupin fiction's first detective. (He is a series detective too, reappearing in "The Mystery of Marie Roget" and "The Purloined Letter.") The story is a curious one, beginning with a couple of pages arguing the natural superiority of checkers to chess as a game of pure ratiocination and ending with an orangutan unmasked as the murderer. In its course its author set several remarkable precedents. He employed a mere mortal as Doyle took this device and made it his own, and ever since we have called such narrators Watsons. At the same time, Poe pitted his hero against the humbling and unimaginative police, and this pattern of antagonism has characterized much of mystery fiction down through the years.
Both Nero Wolfe and Philip Marlowe are descendants of Dupin, so it is only fitting that American mystery fiction's highest accolade should be named for his creator. The Edgar Allan Poe awards are presented annually by the Mystery Writers of America in the form of a rather woebegone porcelain bust of the great man.
But did it really start with Poe? Men have been writing about crime ever since Cain invented fratricide, and I don't know that there is any level of literary excellence that some sort of crime fiction has not attained. Hamlet is many things, but if it is not a detective story, what on earth is? It is, to be sure, a story as vague and uncertain as its hero murdered, and Hamlet's mother and stepfather may or may not have done it. The plot of Hamlet has turned up, by coincidence or by design, in a number of mystery novels, not the least of them Fredric Brown's Edgar-winning first novel, The Fabulous Clipjoint.
Murder is a plot element in most Shakespearean tragedy, and many of the plays have their echoes in what we recognize as crime and mystery fiction, even as they have their antecedents in the playwright's own resource material. Othello, King Lear, Macbeth, Julius Caesar-crime stories, every one of them, their pages fairly dripping blood.
What is Les Miserables but a crime story? What is Crime and Punishment but a story of, well, crime and punishment? Or Dreiser's An American Tragedy? Or Hemingway's "The Killers"?
Still, it would seem that crime fiction does constitute a category, and that not every book with a crime central to its plot perforce belongs in that category as mysteries. Others are not. The distinction is easier to make than to define; as someone said of pornography, one can't define it, but knows it when one sees it.
A few years ago the publishing industry had a very useful definition of a mystery. A mystery, everyone agreed, was any novel about a crime that was sure to sell between three and six thousand hardcover copies. As a result of this perception, a publishers who had something they thought might sell respectably did what they could to hide the fact that the book was what most people would label a mystery.
All of this changed utterly, and a glance at the New York Times best-seller list makes the reason clear. Week after week, books that are undeniably mysteries occupy a dominant position. Writers like Dick Francis and Tony Hillerman and Elmore Leonard and Sue Grafton and Martin Cruz Smith and Robert B. Parker hit the list with every book they write. Books about the detection of crime are selling personal growth.
Why?
The explanation that seems to me to make the most sense holds that readers have a hunger for more substance than much contemporary mainstream fiction provides. Minimalist novels, academic novels, novels that aren't about anything tend to garner M.F.A. degrees and National Endowment for the Arts grants without winning over the reading public. I read recently of a woman who has been secretly getting her reading matter from the Young Adult section because the books are about something. Much of crime fiction, too, is about something. There's a crime, and there's an attempt to do something about it. There are characters, and some of them live and some of them die, and the whole thing works out in the end. Or it doesn't, and that's how it works out. Either way there's a story, and you want to know what happens next.
What happened next in my own career is that I kept at it. I wrote more and other magazines. I wrote other stuff too. Articles for the male adventure magazines. A couple of true confession stories. A slew of erotic paperback novels. The fabricated case histories of a nonexistent psychiatrist.
This and that.
The ideas that came to me and the stories that worked best for me tended to fit somewhere in the broad category of mystery and suspense. Even when they didn't start out that way, they tended to wind up there.
For example, in the late sixties I wrote a lighthearted little novel, a sort of Lecher in the Rye about a seventeen-year-old boy and his efforts to lose his virginity. Gold Medal published it as No Score, with the by-line Chip Harrison, that being the name of the narrator. It sold particularly well, probably because it had a terrific cover, and I was moved to write a sequel, which the publisher imaginatively titled Chip Harrison Scores Again.
Well, I wanted to write more about Chip, but'd been seventeen years old and innocent. In the second he was a year older and a good deal more experienced. At this rate he'd be a jaded roue in no time at all, and his charm was by no means the sort that age can not wither, nor custom stale.
Inspiration struck. In the third book I put him to work for a private detective, a road-company Nero Wolfe, and knew he'd last like an insect in amber. "You were wise to take this job," his employer told him. "Now you'll never grow old. You'll be the same age forever, like all the private eyes in fiction." He never did grow old, but not because of the mystery's fountain-of-youth properties. Alas, after he'd appeared in two Nero Wolfe pastiches I ran out of things for him to do and let him retire.
Some fictional detectives age. Some stay young (or middleaged or old) forever. Some posthumously; in them she killed off her two most enduring detectives, Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple. Nicholas Freeling did not wait for his own death to kill his Inspector Van der Valk. He bumped him off in midcareer in remarkably cavalier fashion, and alienated most of his readers in the process. Conan Doyle tried that, sending Sherlock Holmes over the Reichenbach Falls, but wound up bringing him back in response to popular demand.
At the other extreme some fictional detectives outlive their creators. A number of writers have kept Sherlock Holmes going, often matching him up with historical personages; in one of the more successful books, Holmes and Sigmund Freud wind up doing coke together. Robert Goldsborough wrote a Nero Wolfe novel after Rex Stout's death with the aim of amusing his mother. He has since written and published several more. A couple of years ago a dozen writers produced an anthology of new stories about Philip Marlowe, ostensibly to honor Raymond Chandler on his hundredth birthday. I suppose it it once every hundred years.
There are, as everyone knows, two kinds of people in the world: those who divide the world into two kinds of people and those who don't. The world of crime fiction gets similarly cleft in twain. Mysteries are divided into two categories: the tough, gritty, mean-streets, in-your-face kind, which is labeled hardboiled, and the gentle, effete, British country-house body-in- the-library sort, which is called cozy. Stereotypically, the hard-boiled mystery is American. It features, and is very likely narrated by, a private detective, a hard-drinking softhearted cynic who looks a little like Humphrey Bogart when he's not looking like Robert Mitchum. The hard-boiled novel is written by a man and read by men. It is sour and downbeat and violent, and it means business.
In contrast, the cozy is English, written by women and for women. Its detective is apt to be an inspired amateur, male or female, and all its characters be well spoken and courteous, decorous even in death. Its violence is offstage and unthreatening, leaning toward esoteric poisons and ingenious murder methods. The sleuth sets things right by working out an elaborate puzzle, and order is restored to a universe that is orderly at heart.
These stereotypes are undoubtedly useful, but they have their downside. Their rules are broken in book after book. British writers drag the reader through London's mean streets while Americans employ country-house settings. Women write hard-boiled private-eye novels about tough female detectives, and other women read them, while men turn out intricately plotted cozies.
More to the point, the stereotypes tend to trivialize books of either persuasion. The cozy would seem to be frivolous, a bit of fluff that diminishes murder, and some of its specimens may have that effect. Yet no one epitomizes the cozy writer more than Agatha Christie, with her brilliantly worked plots and her comforting village settings. Her finest creation, Miss Jane Marple of St. Mary's old lady in plimsolls with a steel-trap mind. The books are entertainments, surely. And yet they are dead serious. Christie's concern in all her fiction, and especially in the Marple books, is the nature and origin of human evil. It is possible to read the novels attentively without becoming aware of it, but make no mistake about it, that is what they are about.
One of the abiding virtues of crime fiction, it seems to me, and one of the chief factors in its survival over the generations as a literary genre, is the seemingly infinite variety of work that falls within its scope. The house of mystery has many mansions, and it is a rare reader who can't find something he or she likes in one chamber or another. Now and then I run into someone who professes never to read mysteries, and I find such specimens at least as curious as those who read nothing else. The majority seem to be people who never got the knack sort who read one mystery once, didn't much like it, and assumed all others to be the same.
As a reader I have always been able to find crime novels to read even as my own taste has changed and evolved. As a writer I have found that the genre's wide-spaced boundaries have allowed me to write whatever it has occurred to me to write without placing myself beyond the pale. Over the years I have written novels about four different series characters. Evan Tanner, who has appeared in seven books, is a sort of freelance adventurer whose sleep center was destroyed by a stray shard of shrapnel. He speaks innumerable languages, supports no end of lost causes (among them the restoration of the House of Stuart to the British throne), and slips himself and others across international borders, all in the interest of peace and freedom.
Bernie Rhodenbarr is a bookseller by day, a burglar by night. Typically he has to solve an intricate murder puzzle in order a burglary. He is an urbane and literate chap, a nice guy who lives on the West Side and steals on the East Side. Whoopi Goldberg played him in the movie. (Don't ask) His best friend is a lesbian poodle groomer.
Matthew Scudder is an alcoholic ex-cop, divorced, living alone in a cheap hotel in the West Fifties, eking out a living as an unlicensed private eye. He hangs out in churches (and, recently, at AA meetings in church basements), leads an angst-ridden life, and walks down some very mean streets indeed.
And I've already mentioned Chip Harrison, playing a horny adolescent Archie Goodwin to Leo Haig's version of Nero Wolfe.
Here's the point. These series differ considerably one from another-in type, in tone, in purpose. And I've also written a dozen or so nonseries novels, and they don't run to type either. Yet all these books manage to be at home in the field me in all my guises. One working private detective is a big Scudder fan but won't read my Bernie Rhodenbarr books, because he disapproves of my glorifying a character who is, when all is said and done, a miscreant and a lawbreaker. Some of Bernie's fans find Scudder's world too relentlessly downbeat for them. Quite a few readers have found Tanner's exploits too far-fetched to be taken seriously, yet others keep turning up to ask me when I'm going to write another book about him.
I should say something about fans. Compared with science fiction, mysteries barely have a true fandom. Science-fiction fans hold dozens of conventions annually, read everything written in their chosen field and nothing outside it, publish innumerable amateur magazines and newsletters ("fanzines"), and, according to one of the field's leading editors, are all fifteen-year-old boys who aren't very well socialized.
Mystery fans assemble at a single annual convention, the Bouchercon, named for the late more renowned as the field's foremost critic. Held every year in a different city, Bouchercon brings together upward of five hundred crimefiction devotees. One writer is chosen as the annual guest of honor, his expenses paid by the host committee, but fifty or more other writers pay full price for the chance to natter away on celebrity panels, inscribe books for fans, hang out with booksellers and editors, and play poker until daybreak.
Bouchercon is always a great success, and a big factor here, I'm convinced, is the estimable nature of the people involved. Mystery readers are an uncommonly literate lot, inclined to choose substance over pretense every time. (It is interesting to note what they read outside the genre. Several mystery bookstores carry the odd nonmystery now and then because the proprietor just knows it will appeal to the store's customers. Most but by no means all of these books are about cats. W. R. Kinsella's Shoeless Joe sold well in mystery bookshops, as prodigy, The Queen's Gambit.)
The mystery bookstore is largely a phenomenon of the last decade. Booksellers in general are a dedicated bunch, and the proprietors of stores dealing exclusively in mysteries would not be in the field if they did not love it. Their shops often have the ambience of clubhouses, and many of their customers drop in as much to chat as to buy books. Murder Ink, Grounds for Murder, Sherlock's Home, Rue Morgue, Footprints of a Gigantic Hound, Booked for Murder, Foul Play, The Butler Did it, Murder Undercover, Once Upon a Crime, Murder for Pleasure, Scene of the Crime-the ingenuity displayed in the stores' names suggests the resourcefulness of the people who operate them.
Finally, mystery writers themselves tend to be an amiable sort. At a recent Bouchercon in Philadelphia, several of us were sitting around while one talked about his difficulties with an author. "What's remarkable about the guy," someone said, "field. I can think of a few guys I'm not crazy about, but he's the only real bastard around."
I could, if pressed, name another, but given the traditional nature of auctorial ego and artistic temperament, it seems extraordinary that such a large barrel should have so few sour apples in it.
While I'll leave it to psychiatry to explain why men and women who spend their lives writing about bloody murder should be so affable on their own time, I can guess why we're so apt to relish one another's company. The great majority of us are enthusiastic readers of crime fiction. Most of us were fans before we were writers, and continue to read one another's work avidly.
Besides such domestic organizations as Mystery Writers of America and Private Eye Writers of America, I belong to a fairly new outfit called the International Association of Crime Writers, with members on both sides of what we used to call the Iron Curtain. In Gijon, on Spain's northern coast. There were around sixty writers present from all over the world, and the majority of us were unfamiliar with one another's work. Most of our contingent spoke only English, and the group as a whole was a testament to the far-reaching effects of the Tower of Babel. There was one woman from Japan who came accompanied by an interpreter, and even he could barely understand her, as her first language was some outer-island dialect more exotic than Basque.
No matter. We all were crime writers. Everybody had a wonderful time.
Oh, all right. Enough stalling. A piece like this has to have a ten-best list, doesn't it?
People do keep coming up with lists. An English mystery writer published a book not long ago with two-page discourses on each of his hundred favorites. (I'd mention his name, but he didn't mention mine, so to hell with him.) My list has a couple of of all, it consists solely of American writers. I am writing, after all, for a magazine devoted to matters American, so I trust I am not being excessively parochial in keeping foreign writers off this particular list.
It is perhaps largely for this reason that most of the writers I've listed are of the hard-boiled school. Born in the detective pulps after the turn of the present century, hardboiled crime fiction was very much an American invention.
After Poe, pre-eminence in the mystery field passed to the British. Wilkie Collins wrote The Moonstone, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle created Sherlock Holmes, R. Austin Freeman wrote about Dr. Thorndyke, and any number of British writers went on to develop the detective story as a suspenseful adventure, an intellectual exercise, and a look into the darker corners of the human psyche.
Some American writers followed in these British footsteps, with greater or lesser success. But in the pulp magazines another tradition was born. Crude, violent, rough-edged, a new voice that caught much of the spirit of post-World War I America.
A group of writers centered on Black Mask magazine forged hard-boiled fiction into something honest and vigorous; of their number, Hammett and Chandler emerged to produce something that will pass for Art. Years after their passing we still write this sort of book better than anyone else. The French have an insatiable appetite for the roman noir and accord the work considerable critical respect-rather more, I sometimes think, than it truly deserves. But very few of the hard-boiled crime novels published in France are homegrown.
The British can write hard-boiled books, but some of their best tough writers set their books in America, as if to say that a hard-boiled crime story demands an American setting. James Hadley Chase and Peter Chambers, the latter a devoted admirer of Raymond Chandler, are quite popular at home but have never traveled well, and few of their books are published here. Their American settings and dialogue may strike a British reader American ear. (This sort of thing works both ways. An American woman writes British cozies set in England, to the rich delight of an enormous American following. Most of her fans assume she's English, a mistake no English reader would be likely to make. "She gets everything all wrong," an English fan told me. "I can't believe your lot takes her seriously.")
At the same time, I have to admit that the preponderance of the hard-boiled on my list reflects a prejudice of the author. I tend to prefer hard-boiled (or, if you will, realistic) crime fiction and to see it as of more fundamental importance than softer, gentler books.
The reader will further note that my list has no women on it. This would certainly appear evidence of blatant sexism, and perhaps it is. In rebuttal I would argue that Agatha Christie and Dorothy Sayers would certainly be on my list but for the fact that they are British list, too, but for the happy fact that they are alive.
Because, you see, I have listed only writers who have gone to that great Bouchercon in the sky. I have mentioned how generous and amiable mystery writers are, how much I enjoy their company, how well we all get along. If you think I am going to change all that by assembling a list of favorites and leaving some of them off it, you're out of your mind.
One last note. This is a list not of best books but of favorite writers, although I have occassionally mentioned a book or two that I remember with special fondness.
Here's the good news: Instead of ten favorites, I seem to have come up with sixteen. And it was easy to put them in order. I just used the alphabet.
Anthony Boucher (1911-68). Boucher's reputation rests largely upon his influence as a reviewer, which was monumental. From 1951 until his column for The New York Times Book Review, covering virtually everything of note published in the mystery field. He reviewed paperback originals at a time when no one else took much notice of them, discovered and encouraged promising new writers, and widened the tastes of his readers while sharpening their perceptions. During many of the same years he also reviewed plays and opera and science fiction, appeared on radio and television, edited a science-fiction magazine and a number of anthologies, and died young after many years of intermittent ill health.
In addition, he wrote eight novels and a couple of dozen short stories. I think it is safe to say that he would have been more prominent as a writer of fiction if less of his energy had gone into other pursuits. His books are slight, but their charm and the skill with which they were written keep them sprightly and engaging. My own favorite, though but dimly recalled, is Nine Times Nine, a locked-room mystery investigated by Sister Ursula of the and editor Anthony Boucher was always an easy mark for a story with a nun or a cat in it.)
It was published under the name H. H. Holmes, an alias previously employed by a mass murderer of the nineteenth century. "Anthony Boucher" was itself a pen name; the author's actual name was William Anthony Parker White.
Fredric Brown (1906-72). I discovered Fredric Brown around the time I began selling stories to the crime pulps, and I read everything of his I could get my hands on. One time, after a hard week at a literary agency where I was gainlessly employed as a reader of unsolicited submissions, I read Murder Can Be Fun, in which a murder is committed early on in full view of dozens of bystanders-by a killer dressed up as Santa Claus. I had a bottle of bourbon on the table, and every time Brown's hero took a drink, I had a snort myself. This is a hazardous undertaking when in the given to understand, would have been just as dangerous around the author himself. By the time the book was finished, so was I.
Brown was a playful, inventive, prolific writer who never wrote the same book twice. The Fabulous Clipjoint, his Edgar-winning first novel, is perhaps his best book. In it young Ed Hunter joins forces with his uncle Ambrose, a former carnival performer, to investigate the murder of Ed's father. The Chicago background is perfect, the carny lore a big plus. The Screaming Mimi and Night of the Jabberwock are also vintage Brown. My own favorite is The Wench Is Dead, about a sociology professor immersing himself in L.A.'s Skid Row in the name of research.
James M. Cain (1892-1977). While he is generally regarded as one of the seminal figures of hard-boiled crime fiction, Cain would have no part of it. "I belong to no school, hardboiled or otherwise," he insisted.
Oh, well. The basis of two books, The Postman Always Rings Twice and Double Indemnity, Cain's place in the field is assured. He wrote sparely and convincingly of ordinary and fundamentally decent human beings moved by sexual passion to commit murder for gain. A whole generation of strong American fiction, the archetypal gold-medal novels of Charles Williams and Gil Brewer and others, springs directly from these two books.
Not everyone admired him. "Everything he touches smells like a billy goat," Raymond Chandler complained. "He is every kind of writer I detest, a faux naif, a Proust in greasy overalls, a dirty little boy with a piece of chalk and a board fence and nobody looking."
I always think of Cain when the subject of film adaptation comes up. Several of his novels were filmed, and he was often asked how he felt about what Hollywood had done to his books. "But they have done nothing to my books," he would reply. "They are right them."
Raymond Chandler (1888-1959). Chandler has long been the intellectual's darling, a mystery writer for people who don't like mysteries. On the one hand, he talked of taking murder out of the English drawing room and putting it in the streets where it belonged. At the same time, his characters spent a surprising amount of time in the homes and haunts of the California rich, a West Coast equivalent of the country house on the moors. His achievement, it seems to me, is less that he brought the traditional mystery into the alleys and gutters than that he put a novelist's spin on the pulp tradition of Dime Detective and Black Mask.
All the novels are first-rate, except for Playback, a tired and confused effort published a year before the author's death. I suppose my own favorite is The Long Good-bye, which shows rather more of Chandler's detective Philip Marlowe than did any of the previous books. In its exploration of Marlowe's a novel of character as of plot. If ultimately flawed, The Long Good-bye thereby fits Randall Jarrell's definition of a novel - a lengthy prose narrative with something wrong with it.
Stanley Ellin (1916-86). Stanley Ellin was a perfectionist, working slowly and deliberately, producing a page of typescript on a good day. He admitted to having rewritten the opening paragraph of a short story as many as forty times before going on to the next paragraph and polishing each subsequent page in similar fashion before proceeding further.
It is possible to write short stories in this fashion, and Ellin consistently wrote the best mystery short stories of his time. His very first published story, "The Specialty of the House," endures as a classic, although it is probably less surprising to today's reader simply because so much fuss has been made about it. But all of Ellin's stories are wonderful. He managed only one a year, sent each in turn to Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine, financial remuneration, if less critical acclaim, for his novels. (He did not write them as slowly and laboriously as the stories. You can't.) An early private-eye novel, The Eighth Circle, impressed me when I read it years ago. His later novels never worked terribly well for me, but the short stories are timeless, and a national treasure.
Erie Stanley Gardner (1889-1970). Eighty-two novels about Perry Mason. Nine about D.A. Doug Selby. Twenty-nine (under the name A. A. Fair) about the private-eye team of Donald Lam and Bertha Cool. If Stanley Ellin crept through his stories at a snail's pace, Erle Stanley Gardner wrote as if his hair was on fire.
I discovered Perry Mason when I was twelve, and I don't know how many of the books I read over the next three or four years. They were relentlessly formulaic, and in a sense, if you'd read one, you'd read them all. On would enjoy them all.
The prose narration was sloppy, the descriptions cliched. Gardner hurried through those parts, and so does the reader. But the dialogue, effortless for the author, was absolutely masterly, and the courtroom scenes, however unrealistic they may have been, worked magically upon the page.
Mason himself changed over the years. In the earlier books he himself was a shady character, willing to bend and even break the law in the service of a client. He grew respectable in his middle years, when most of his cases were serialized in The Saturday Evening Post, and he turned staid and dull later on.
After a period of neglect Perry Mason seems to be coming back into favor with readers. Try one of the pre-war Masons-The Case of the Sulky Girl is a good one-or any of the A. A. Fair books. The latter are very different, breezily narrated by Donald Lam, and characterized by much better writing than the Masons.
Dashiell Hammett (very small body of work. After several years laboring for the pulps, he published five novels in as many years, then wrote virtually nothing for the remaining twenty-seven years of his life. And the last of the novels, The Thin Man, is really not much good.
No matter. The others are superb, as impressive now as when they were written more than a half-century ago.
Hammett was a Pinkerton detective before he started writing, and his experience informs his work. But his greatness is far more than a matter of being able to write knowledgeably of crime and criminals. Both his literary style and his artistic vision cast an unsparing light on Prohibitionera America. In sentences that were flat and uninflected and remarkably nonjudgmental, he did much the same thing Hemingway did. I would argue that he did it better.
The Maltese Falcon is my own favorite, and the Bogart film won't spoil it for you; the book quite literally is the John Huston screenplay.
special perceptions of a detective to crime fiction, Chester Himes came at it from the other side. He began writing toward the end of a seven-year stretch in an Ohio state penitentiary. His first books were novels of the black experience, critically successful but not widely read. In 1957 he wrote his first crime novel and introduced his pair of Harlem detectives, Grave Digger Jones and Coffin Ed Johnson, who were to appear in eight more books.
Savage, violent, and wildly funny, Himes was never as successful in America as he was in France, where he lived from 1953 until his death. I don't know how well the books hold up, but I know they were terrific when I read them, especially Cotton Comes to Harlem.
John D. MacDonald (1916-86). The creator of Travis McGee, boat bum and self-styled salvage expert, had an M.B.A. degree from Harvard Business School. I don't suppose that's anywhere near as weird as Wallace Stevens working for in his spare time, but it's a far cry from the way Hammett and Himes prepped for their writing careers.
It seems likely that McGee, hero of twenty-two fast-paced novels, will stand as MacDonald's greatest creation. By the time McGee made his initial appearance in The Deep Blue Goodby in 1964, MacDonald had already published some forty books, all but a handful of them paperback originals. They're almost all crime novels, and they're almost all excellent.
The French, connoisseurs of our literary dark side, don't know from MacDonald, and on reflection I can understand why. For all the ecological foreboding of the McGee books, MacDonald's vision is not on the surface noir at all. His sensibilities were always Middle American, and his characters approached difficult situations with the problemsolver attitude of an engineer. But there is a darkness to MacDonald, evident in his unparalleled ability to limn a sociopath, present too in that neglected late work One More Sunday. But it but the somehow bleaker darkness of a light that has failed.
Some of the late McGees are weak books, but so what? Start with The Deep Blue Goodby and read them all in order. Of the non-McGees, I have especially fond recollections of The End of the Night and One Monday We Killed Them All. Each in its own quiet way is dark enough to make noir look like a light show.
Ross Macdonald (1915-83). Ross Macdonald was born Kenneth Millar and wrote his first mystery novels under that name. Then he wrote one book as John Macdonald and five as John Ross Macdonald, finally dropping the "John" to avoid confusion with John D. MacDonald.
He began writing in frank imitation of Hammett and Chandler, and the early books in the Lew Archer series are markedly Chandleresque, with Archer wisecracking briskly in the Philip Marlowe mode.
With The Doomsters in 1958 and The Galton Case a year later, Macdonald came into his own and went on to Against the background of the Southern California ecosystem in metastasis, Archer bears witness as the mills of God relentlessly exact retribution for longpast sins.
A few years ago my wife and I were in West Africa for three weeks. We had plenty of luxuries, like food and water, but nothing to read, and the only books and magazines available were in French. Then, in our hotel in Lome, the capital of Togo, I discovered five Lew Archers, secondhand paperbacks that had been badly printed in India. The newsdealer wanted an extortionary ten dollars apiece for them, and I paid it willingly. They sustained us all the way back to JFK.
Of course we had read them all before, some of them two or three times. It didn't matter. It is one of the singular properties of Ross Macdonald's fiction that ten minutes after you have turned the last page, every detail of the plot vanishes forever from your mind. I'm sure I could reread those sense of deja vu.
In a sense the plot of every book is much the same. A character did something reprehensible twenty or thirty or forty years ago-in the war, perhaps, or in Canada. Now things begin to fall apart, and, even as Archer rushes around trying to forestall disaster, the guilty and innocent alike are sucked down into the primordial Freudian ooze.
Wonderful books. Read any of the post-1958 Archers for a start. And don't throw it away when you're done. In a few years you'll be able to read it again for the first time.
Ellery Queen (Frederic Dannay, 1905-82, and Manfred B. Lee, 1905-71). Prohibition must have been a time of great self-discovery. Even as Americans were discovering themselves as hard and tough and cynical, and confirming this discovery in the works of Hammett and Chandler, so were many of us waking up to find ourselves clever, and rejoicing in our mental agility by working crossword puzzles, of the Algonquin crowd. And by reading intricate deductive mystery novels and trying to figure them out.
The books of Frederic Dannay and Manfred Lee, two cousins from Brooklyn, were by-lined Ellery Queen and featured a detective of the same name. (They were not firstperson narratives, however; Ellery Queen wrote about himself in the third person.) They took the intellectual puzzle of S. S. Van Dine's insufferable Philo Vance and elevated it to its highest level. Vintage Ellery Queen mysteries (The Greek Coffin Mystery, The Chinese Orange Mystery) feature a formal challenge to the reader at the point where all the clues needed to solve the puzzle have been furnished. The books were always fair, and diabolically clever.
During the forties Ellery Queen matured artistically, and the books became more than brainteasers, with a richness of character and setting and mood. Calamity Town, Ten Days' Wonder, and Cat of Many Tails are especially successful.
The books alone make up a towering body stories, innumerable radio plays, and four decades at the editorship of the field's pre-eminent magazine, and the extent of Lee and Dannay's achievement begins to become clear.
Jack Ritchie (1922-83). For years I did the same thing whenever I got hold of a copy of Ellery Queen or Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine. I looked to see if there was a story by Jack Ritchie. If there was, I read it right away.
Ritchie was a miniaturist in an age when writers are judged by the number of trees cut down to print their work. He wrote only short stories, and he tried to do so without wasting a word. His work was sprightly and surprising and always engaging, and he never wrote an awkward sentence or a lifeless line of dialogue.
Then one day he died, and his stories went on appearing for several months and then trickled out, and ever since I have picked up those magazines with diminishing anticipation. Nowadays I look to If they have, I read it right away.
Rex Stout (1886-1975). I know several men and women who are forever rereading the Nero Wolfe books. They read other things as well, of course, but every month or two they have another go at one of Stout's novels. Since there are forty books, it takes them four or five years to get through the cycle, at which time they can start in again at the beginning. They do this not for the plots, which are serviceable, of for the suspense, which is minimal even on first reading. Nor are they hoping for fresh insight into the human condition. No, they reread the books for the same reason so many of us do, for the joy of spending a few hours in the most congenial household in American letters, the brownstone on West Thirty-fifth Street that is home to Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin.
The relationship of these two, Wolfe the genius and Archie the man of Wolfe's eccentricities -- the orchids, the agoraphobia, the food and drink, the yellow pajamas -- than the nuances of character that keep us transfixed. Stout wrote these books almost effortlessly, in a matter of weeks, and his first drafts went to the printer with no need to change so much as a comma. They seem as flawless today, and utterly timeless.
Jim Thompson (1906-76). Thompson published twenty-nine books during his lifetime, all but one of them paperback originals. More than half of his output appeared in the fifties, with five books each published in 1953 and 1954. Most of them were published by Lion Books, a third-rate house. They were rarely reviewed and never commanded a wide readership. In the late sixties Thompson did a few novelizations of films and television shows to make ends meet. By the time he died, all his books were long out of print.
Now, seventeen years after his death, Jim Thompson is the hottest writer around. back in print, and there are several films in production or recently released, among them the highly successful The Grifters, the screenplay of which earned the mystery writer Donald E. Westlake an Oscar nomination.
For years Thompson was unjustly neglected. Now I suspect he's getting rather more attention than he deserves. His books are intermittently wonderful, casting a cold eye indeed on life and death and providing an utterly unsparing view of the human condition. They are also intermittently awful, flawed by chapters of slapdash writing, adolescent character development, and mechanical plotting.
The Killer Inside Me, Pop. 1280, and The Getaway show Thompson at his best. He is surely an important writer and very much worth reading, but it helps to keep it in mind that the stuff ain't Shakespeare.
Charles Willeford (1919-88). In one of his Hoke Mosely mysteries, Charles Willeford supplied a character who had retired after a lifetime spent painting pinstripes on the sides of automobiles. He now lived walk through his neighborhood with a kind word and a cheerful smile for everyone he met. He carried a walking stick, its hollow interior stocked with poisoned meat pellets; the affable old boy delighted in poisoning every dog that crossed his path.
I can't think of anyone else who could have created that little man, let alone made him work. Willeford kept coming up with quirky characters and put them in wonderfully quirky books. A career soldier in the horse cavalry and a highly decorated tank commander in World War II, he wrote a variety of books over the years, all of them providing a skewed vision of the universe.
It was in the Hoke Mosely novels, starting with Miami Blues, that Willeford came into his full powers as a writer. He wrote four of them, each better than the last, and was just beginning to win the wide readership and critical recognition he deserved when he went and died. It was the sort of joke he would have appreciated. of a fifth Mosely novel, darker than dark, unpublishably dark, with Hoke rounding things out by murdering his own teen-age daughters. If that manuscript's out there somewhere, I want to read it. Meanwhile, read the other four in order. Willeford wrote two volumes of autobiography, I Was Looking for a Street and Something About a Soldier. Both are a treat.
Cornell Woolrich (1903-68). A couple of years ago I read a Woolrich short story in which a pulp writer locks himself in a hotel room and works all night to meet a deadline. When he's done, he falls asleep, exhausted; when he wakes up, he's horrified to discover that the pages are blank. There was no ribbon in the typewriter. Presumably the hero took each page in turn from the typewriter without noting the absence of words on it.
Cornell Woolrich was capable of this sort of plotting. Loose ends and illogical twists and turns abound in his books, but they seems to me, lay in his unrivaled ability to make novels of the stuff of nightmares. Woolrich's characters prowl tacky dance halls and alleyways. They smoke dope in strange apartments, swallow spiked cocktails, and run hallucinating through unfamiliar streets. The suspense is relentless, the sense of impending doom ever present.
Woolrich wrote his best books early on, starting with The Bride Wore Black in 1940.
The most noteworthy aspect of my list, it seems to me, is the number of significant writers I've had to leave out. I could easily have included a dozen more. If I were fool enough to include living writers, I'd have had to write a book. Because, for all the talk one hears of the mystery's vintage years, I think it is abundantly clear that the very best crime fiction ever is being written today These are the good old days, and a very real reason for the huge popularity of mysteries is that the genre is in its Golden writing crime novels, and they are doing extraordinary things within the genre, things no one has previously attempted.
If there's a lot of wheat, surely there's no end of chaff. I suppose 90 percent of what's being published today is nothing special, but when was it ever otherwise? The good stuff, I assure you, is very good indeed.
You'll excuse me, I hope, if I decline to point it out to you. But think of the fun you'll have digging it out for yourself!
PHOTO: Two eyes (COLLECTION OF OTTO PENZLER, PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN HARTMAN)
PHOTOS (4): Classic mysteries from the 1930s and '40s: it is perhaps an indication of the genre's vigor that a first edition of The Maltese Falcon has fetched $27,000 at auction. (COLLECTION OF OTTO PENZLER, PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN HARTMAN)
PHOTOS (5): The perpetrators: left to right, Dashiell Hammett; James M. Cain in 1943; 1955 prize winners Georges Simenon, Rex Stout, and Manfred Lee and Frederic Dannay, who made up Ellery Queen; and Raymond Chandler. (BETTMANN ARCHIVE)
PHOTO: Possibly the best of Raymond Chandler's tough, melancholy classic Philip Marlowe novels. (COLLECTION OF OTTO PENZLER, PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN HARTMAN)
PHOTO: Jim Thompson's books are bleak, crude, hasty, savage, and beloved by the French. (COLLECTION OF OTTO PENZLER, PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN HARTMAN)
PHOTO: Lawrence Block, matching wits with himself.
ILLUSTRATIONS (6)
By Lawrence Block

Lawrence Block has twice won the Edgar Award. Some Days You Get the Bear, a collection of his short stories, is just out from William Morrow; a novel, The Devil Knows You're Dead, follows in November.

WILLIAM JAMES'S EXHILARATING movement to sweep aside all philosophies is making a surprising comeback a century later
IN ORDINARY SPEECH, PRAGMATISM CONNOTES PRACTICALLY, COMMON sense, feet on the ground -- virtues Americans like to think of as specifically American virtues. One thing the term does not connote is philosophical speculation. When we say someone is pragmatic, we are usually implying that he or she is not given to abstract rumination. But pragmatism is also the name of a particular type of philosophy. It was first introduced publicly nearly a hundred years ago, in 1898, by William James, and for several decades arguments over it dominated American philosophy. Then, in the 1930s, it went into a long period of eclipse, almost forgotten amid the emergence of new philosophical schools and theoretical paradigms. But since 1980 it has made an astonishing comeback. Legal writers, literary critics, historians, political theorists, and educators -- not to mention philosophers -- are starting to call themselves pragmatists. And by that term they mean to invoke the philosophical tradition of a it? Where did it come from? Pragmatism is an account of the way people think. This may not seem like a terribly useful thing to have. After all, if pragmatism's account of the way people think is accurate, then we are already thinking the way pragmatists tell us we are. Why would we need a description of something we do anyway without it? It is as though someone were to offer us an account of the way our hair grows with the promise that having it will give us nicer hair. But pragmatists don't believe there is a problem with the way people think. They believe there is a problem with the way people think they think. They believe, in other words, that other accounts of the way people think are mistaken; they believe that these mistaken accounts are responsible for a large number of conceptual puzzles; and they believe that these puzzles, when they are not simply wasting the energy of the people who spend their time trying to solve them to cope with the world. Pragmatism is therefore an effort to unhitch human beings from what pragmatists regard as a useless structure of bad abstractions about thought. The sheer bravado of the attempt, the suggestion that all we need to do to lighten our load is just drop the whole contraption over the side of a cliff and continue on doing what we want to be doing anyway, makes pragmatist writing exhilarating to read. The classic pragmatist essays -- Charles Sanders Peirce's "How to Make Our Ideas Clear," William James's "The Will to Believe," Oliver Wendell Holmes's "The Path of the Law," Richard Rorty's "Philosophy as a Kind of Writing" -- have a kind of ground-clearing sweep to them that gives many readers the sense that a pressing but vaguely understood obligation has suddenly been lifted from their shoulders, that some final examination for which they could never possibly have felt prepared has just been canceled.
What has seemed liberating to some readers has, of course nonchalance with which pragmatists tend to dispose of issues that have engaged other thinkers has always struck many people as intellectually slipshod and morally dangerous. "Pragmatism is a matter of human needs," wrote G. K. Chesterton in 1908, when international interest in pragmatism was first at its height, "and one of the first of human needs is to be something more than a pragmatist." If the pragmatist account is correct, warned Bertrand Russell a year later, then "ironclads and Maxim guns must be the ultimate arbiters of metaphysical truth." Pragmatists today have attracted similar sorts of hostility. They have been accused of purveying what one writer has called "a **27;999;TOOLONG that verges on nihilism and that may ultimately subvert liberal democracy" and what another has denounced as an "abandonment of traditional standards of objectivity, truth, and rationality, which opens the way for an educational agenda one of whose primary purposes is to achieve social and political transformation."
PRAGMATISTS -- AND THIS, TO THEIR CRITICS, these objections. For as John Dewey (borrowing a figure from William James) wrote of Chesterton's remark, they spill "the personal milk in the philosopher's cocoanut." They confirm what the pragmatist has always claimed, which is that what people believe to be true is just what they think it is good to believe to be true. The critic who argues from the consequences of accepting the pragmatist account of the way we think -- the critic who warns that dumping those other accounts over a cliff will lead to despair, war, illiberalism, or political correctness -- has (in the pragmatist's view) already conceded the key point, which is that every account of the way people think is, at bottom, a support for those human goods the person making the account believes to be important. The whole force of a philosophical account of anything, pragmatists insist, lies in the advertised consequences of accepting it. When we say to a child, "That's the way the world. We are saying that understanding the world in that way will put the child into a better relation with it, will enable him or her to cope with it more satisfactorily -- even if it means recognizing how unsatisfactory, from a child's point of view (or anyone's), the world can be.
WHAT IS PRAGMATISM'S ACCOUNT OF THE way people think, and how did it arise? The term was introduced to the world by William James in a lecture called "Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results," which he delivered on a visit to the University of California at Berkeley in 1898. James presented what he called "the principle of Peirce, the principle of pragmatism," which he defined as follows: "To attain perfect clearness in our thoughts of an object... we need only consider what effects of a conceivably practical kind the object may involve -- what sensations we are to expect from it, and what reactions we must prepare. Our conception of these effects conception of the object, so far as that conception has positive significance at all." He went on to suggest that this principle might be expressed "more broadly," and he proceeded to do so: "The ultimate test for us of what a truth means is indeed the conduct it dictates or inspires.... the effective meaning of any philosophic proposition can always be brought down to some particular consequence, in our future practical experience, whether active or passive; the point lying rather in the fact that the experience must be particular, than in the fact that it must be active."
What James was doing was stretching a principle of scientific inquiry to cover thinking generally. The principle of scientific inquiry is the "principle of Peirce." It states that if we want our conception of an object to be meaningful -- or, as Peirce put it, to be "clear" -- then we should limit that conception to the real-world behavior the object will exhibit under all, what we mean when we call a substance "hard" is that it will scratch glass, resist bending, and so on. "Hardness" is not an abstract property or invisible essence; it is just the sum total of what all hard things do.
James's idea was to extend this way of understanding scientific concepts to all our beliefs. What makes any belief true he asked. It is not, he thought, its rational self-sufficiency, its ability to stand up to logical scrutiny. It is that we find that holding the belief leads us into more useful relations with the world. James thought that philosophers had wasted huge amounts of time attempting to derive truths from general first principles, trying to prove or disprove rationally the tenets of various philosophical systems, when all they needed to do was to ask what practical effects our choosing one view rather than another might have. "What is its cash-value in terms of practical experience?" James thought the philosopher ought to ask of into the world according as it were true or false; or as he put it more famously, nine years later, in Pragmatism: "The true is the name for whatever proves itself to be good in the way of belief, and good, too, for definite and assignable reasons."
Words like practical and cash-value may make James seem an advocate of materialism and science. But one of his chief purposes in introducing pragmatism into philosophy was to open a window, in what he regarded as an excessively materialistic and scientific age, for faith in God. We needn't ask, he thought, whether the existence of God can be proved; we need only ask what difference believing or disbelieving in God will make in our lives. If we wait for absolute proof that there is or is not a God, we will wait forever. We have to choose whether to believe on other criteria -- that is, on pragmatic criteria. For this is, James though, how we make proof of anything. All our decisions are bets on what the universe will do.
In crediting the "principle of pragmatism" to Peirce, James was, characteristically, doing a favor for a friend. But he was also helping to establish a genealogy for pragmatism that may contain more legend than history. The attribution was a favor because in 1898 Charles Sanders Peirce was an almost wholly forgotten figure. James had known him well in the 1860s, when both were students at the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. Peirce was the son of a distinguished Harvard professor, the mathematician Benjamin Peirce, and he had already, when James met him, acquired a reputation as a prodigy of mathematics, science, and logic. But his career unfolded disastrously. He lost his academic appointment, at Johns Hopkins University, because of a scandal involving his remarriage. (He had begun living with the woman who would become his second wife after he had separated from but before he had legally divorced the woman who other job, working for the Coastal Survey, a government scientific agency, soon afterward. In 1898, having spent part of the decade in New York City, sleeping on the streets and cadging food from the Century Club (until he was evicted) while on the lam from creditors and assault charges, Peirce was living in poverty and neglect in Pennsylvania, on an enormous dilapidated estate that he had purchased in an ill-considered moment of financial optimism.
James, on the other hand, was a Harvard professor and an international academic celebrity. The publication in 1890 of his Principles of Psychology, a book twelve years in the making, had secured his reputation. So an announcement by him of a new approach to philosophy was assured of attention, as was his attribution of the "principle of pragmatism" to Peirce. In his lecture James referred to an article Peirce had published twenty years before in The Popular Science Monthly (a more scholarly journal than the name suggests), entitled "How to not appear" in that article (or anywhere else before 1898), but James mentioned that Peirce had formulated his principle and begun calling it pragmatism even earlier. "I first heard him enunciate it," James said, "at Cambridge in the early seventies."
WITHIN JUST A few years of James's lecture, pragmatism became a full-fledged intellectual movement, attracting adherents and detractors around the world, and Peirce, still isolated on his Pennsylvania estate, wrote a number of papers -- some published, most unpublished or unfinished -- in the hope, largely unmet, of being recognized as a participant in the debate. In some of the unpublished papers, composed between 1905 and 1908, Peirce amplified James's remark about the origins of pragmatism. "It was in the earliest seventies," he wrote in one of them, "that a knot of us young men in Old Cambridge, calling ourselves half-ironically, half-defiantly, The Metaphysical Club'... used to meet, sometimes in my He listed the names of the other participants in this discussion group: Oliver Wendell Holmes, Joseph Warner, Nicholas St. John Green, Chauncey Wright, John Fiske, and Francis Ellingwood Abbot. (Holmes, Warner, and Green were lawyers; Wright, Fiske, and Abbot, like Peirce and James, were scientists and philosophers.) It was within this circle, Peirce suggested, that pragmatism developed.
This has proved an influential account, although corroboration is thin. Whatever the truth of it, James and Holmes (and, for that matter, Wright and Green, the other figures whose work is associated with pragmatism) had already formulated what is distinctively pragmatic in their views before 1872. Peirce may have given James the name, but he could not have given him the idea.
In 1872 James was just emerging from a nervous collapse that had lasted almost three years. After a wildly peripatetic education in Europe and America, he had finally graduated from the Harvard Medical School (the, at the age of twenty-seven, and immediately fallen into a state of lassitude, depression, and chronic ill health. Whatever the causes of his various symptoms, James seems to have explained them to himself in intellectual terms. He treated his depression as a kind of philosophical problem that might be relieved by coming up with a philosophical solution, and one day in 1870, in his diary, he announced a breakthrough. "I finished the first part of Renouvier's second Essais," he wrote (Charles Renouvier was a nineteenth-century French philosopher), "and see no reason why his definition of Free Will --' the sustaining of a thought because I choose to when I might have other thoughts' -- need be the definition of an illusion. At any rate, I will assume for the present -- until next year -- that it is no illusion. My first act of free will shall be to believe in free will.... Hitherto, when I have felt like taking without carefully waiting for contemplation of the external world to determine all for me, suicide seemed the most manly form to put my daring into: now, I will go a step further with my will, not only act with it, but believe as well; believe in my individual reality and creative power." The breakthrough did not prove definitive; James's complaints persisted. But this passage, with its admonition to act on beliefs without waiting for philosophical confirmation of their validity, is the germ of the doctrine James would announce, twenty-six years later, in "The Will to Believe." And it is the essence of his pragmatism.
HOLMES UNDERWENT HIS OWN CRISIS IN A very different setting. In 1861, at the end of his senior year at Harvard, he enlisted in the Union Army (something James seems scarcely to have contemplated), and he served for three years and in some of the bloodiest fighting of the Civil War. Although he later gave speeches in which he hated war itself. He was seriously wounded three times; the third wound was in the foot, which he hoped would have to be amputated so he could be discharged before his commission was up. That hope was disappointed, but Holmes did emerge from the war purged of illusions. He thought he had paid a high price for the privilege of losing them, and he was careful never to acquire any again.
After his return Holmes attended Harvard Law School and then went into practice with a Boston firm. He also developed an intimate friendship with William James. Their letters were unusually warm and spirited, but their personal relations eventually became strained, and Holmes was always unsympathetic to James's philosophical writings. They seemed to promote, in their spiritual hopefulness, just the sort of sentimental idealism he had rejected. "His wishes led him to turn down the lights so as to give miracle a chance," he complained to a friend after James's death in 1910. Holmes had no high overrated. "But although Holmes would never have referred to himself as a pragmatist, his twentieth-century disciples have not been wrong to understand his jurisprudence as a form of pragmatism.
IN 1870, WHEN HE WAS TWENTY-NINE, HOLMES became co-editor of the American Law Review, and the first paragraph of the first article he published there gives, in a very early nutshell, the pragmatist premise of his jurisprudence: "It is the merit of the common law that it decides the case first and determines the principle afterwards. Looking at the forms of logic it might be inferred that when you have a minor premise and a conclusion, there must be a major, which you are also prepared then and there to assert. But in fact lawyers, like other men, frequently see well enough how they ought to decide on a given state of facts without being very clear as to the ratio decidendi the ground of the decision. Lord Mansfield's often-quoted advice to the business man who was suddenly appointed judge, reasons, as his judgment would probably be right and the reasons wrong, is not without application to more educated courts."
Holmes's target in these sentences was legal formalism, the theory that the law has an internal logical consistency and consists of general doctrines -- such as "a person shall not use his property in a way that injures the property of another" -- that guide the outcomes of particular cases. Holmes devoted his career as a judge and a jurisprudential thinker to demolishing this view of the law, pointing out, for example, that people use their property legally to injure the property of others all the time, as when they set up a shop with the intention of putting the shop owner down the street out of business.
Holmes's insight into the insufficiency of general principles left him with an obvious question, which is, If general principles don't decide cases, what does? His answer was unveiled in the opening paragraph of The Common Law (1881), legal thought: "The life of the law has not been logic; it has been experience." Holmes did not mean that there is no logic in the law. He meant that what guides the direction of the law, from case to case over time, is not immutable reason but changing experience. This assertion has sometimes been misinterpreted to mean that what ultimately determines a judge's decision is his personal background and taste -- what he ate for breakfast. But that is not what Holmes meant by experience. He was not referring to the life history of the individual lawmaker or judge; he was referring to the life history of society. Experience, for him, was the name for everything that arises out of the interaction of the human organism with its environment: beliefs, values, intuitions, customs, prejudices -- what he called "the felt necessities of the time." Our word for it is culture.
For when we think judicially -- when we try to determine what would believed that we think the same way we do when we have to make a practical decision of any sort. We don't do whatever feels pleasant or convenient to us at the moment (since experience teaches that this is rarely a wise basis for making a decision). But we don't reason logically from abstract principles either. Still, our decision, when we are happy with it, never feels subjective or irrational: How could we be pleased if we knew it to be arbitrary? It just feels like the decision we had to reach, and this is because its rightness is a function of its "fit" with the whole inchoate set of cultural assumptions of our world, the assumptions that give the moral weight -- much greater moral weight than logic or taste could ever give -- to every judgment we make. This is why so often we know we're right before we know why we're right. We decide, then we deduce.
Philosophies and theories and formal methodologies are Holmes's view, the dinner jacket and bow tie we instinctively take off when it is time to change the tires. "All the pleasure of life is in general ideas," he wrote to a correspondent in 1899. "But all the use of life is in specific solutions -- which can not be reached through generalities any more than a picture can be painted by knowing some rules of method. They are reached by insight, tact and specific knowledge."
THE ONE SELF-PRO-claimed pragmatist whose writings Holmes admired (and Holmes was not a man ordinarily given to admiration for the views of other people) was John Dewey. In the final chapter of Experience and Nature (1925), the work of the widest philosophical scope among his many books, Dewey praised Holmes as "one of our greatest American philosophers" and went on to quote a long passage from Holmes's essay "Natural Law" (1918). Holmes read the book several times with growing pleasure (what was there, his reaction sums up the reaction many of his contemporaries had both to Dewey's wisdom and to Dewey's style: "It seemed to me... to have a feeling of intimacy with the inside of the cosmos that I found unequaled. So methought God would have spoken had He been inarticulate but keenly desirous to tell you how it was."
Dewey's influence in his own long lifetime -- he was born in 1859, the year of On the Origin of Species, and died in 1952, the year of the hydrogen bomb -- touched many fields. He was a psychologist, a philosopher, a political activist, a public intellectual, and a social reformer. But his most lasting contribution was in the field of education, and although pragmatism, once he took it up, underwrote everything Dewey did, it is his work as an educator that shows its consequences most dramatically.
Dewey began his career as an absolute idealist. He was trained at Johns Hopkins, at a Sylvester Morris, a neo-Hegelian, and he wrote his first books under the influence of Hegel. His work began turning in a pragmatist direction after he read James's Principles of Psychology in 1890. In 1894 he accepted a position as chair of the philosophy department at the newly founded University of Chicago. In 1896 he established the Laboratory School there, an experiment in progressive education run by the department of pedagogy (of which he was also the chair), and began to write the works on education for which he quickly became famous around the world: The School and Society (1899), The Child and the Curriculum (1902), How We Think (1910), and Democracy and Education (1916). The first of these, The School and Society, is one of the most influential educational treatises ever written. Its argument for the importance of the practical in education was adopted (and possibly partly formulated) by Dewey's close friend Jane Addams as the blueprint for the educational programs, at the turn of the century. And the book has never gone out of print.
Dewey regarded Democracy and Education, when it appeared, as the summa of his thought. He believed that philosophers had invented an invidious distinction between knowing and doing, a distinction that had had the intellectually pernicious effect of producing a series of pseudoproblems about the relations between the mind and reality and the socially pernicious effect of elevating a leisure class of speculative thinkers above the world's workers and doers. There was, Dewey thought, no such distinction. Knowing and doing are indivisible aspects of the same process, which is the business of adaptation. We learn, in the progressivist phrase, by doing. We take a piece of acquired knowledge into a concrete situation, and the results we get constitute a new piece of knowledge, which we carry over into our next encounter with the environment. When we try to pin down knowledge by embalming it in a textbook, we cut off thought from experience, is not a mental copy of a reality external to us; "it is an instrument or organ of successful action."
What is democratic about Dewey's theory is that it conceives of learning as a collaborative activity. Dewey thought of the school as a "prepare for social life," as he put it, "is to engage in social life," and this emphasis on the associated nature of human existence is crucial to most of what he wrote about politics and social reform. He believed that individual fulfillment could be achieved only through participation in the collective life; for, outside the collectivity no such thing as an individual was possible. "The non-social individual," he wrote in one of his earliest essays, "is an abstraction arrived at by imagining what man would be if all his human qualities were taken away."
The emphasis on the community as the of experience. It echoes Peirce as well, for Peirce regarded truth as a matter of community consensus rather than individual belief (one of the points on which he was at odds with James). But the thinker Dewey credited with introducing this way of thinking into his own work was George Herbert Mead, whom he met at the University of Michigan in the 1880s and with whom he continued to work after moving to Chicago, where Mead joined him. "From the nineties on," Dewey said in 1939, eight years after Mead's death, "the influence of Mead ranked with that of James."
Mead was a physiologist and psychologist, and his method was to apply a Darwinian model to those areas of inquiry. He explained physiological development in adaptive terms, as something that happens as a result of the interaction of the human being with its environment. He explained consciousness, including the sense of individual identity, in the same manner, as something that happens as a result of. Even our innermost thoughts, in Mead's view, are social. For we think, as we act, relationally; we talk to ourselves. "Inner consciousness," as he put it, "is socially organized by the importation of the social organization of the outer world." The field he developed was social psychology, and its influence on twentieth-century thought extends well beyond pragmatism.
IT IS COMMON TODAY TO SPEAK OF A REVIVAL OF pragmatism, a phenomenon usually dated from the publication of Richard Rorty's Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature in 1979. The implication is that after Peirce, James, Holmes, Dewey, and Mead, pragmatism went into eclipse and that only in the last fifteen years has it re-emerged as a distinctively American style of thought with wide appeal. This notion is not entirely false. Pragmatism after Dewey did go into relative eclipse, and twentieth-century intellectuals have been more likely to identify themselves with other schools of thought -- Marxism, psychoanalysis, existentialism, and structuralism But the notion that pragmatism was eclipsed by other schools of thought in the twentieth century is also a little misleading, and the reason is that it is part of the nature of pragmatism to decline the honor of becoming a "school of thought." Pragmatists have always been wary of the danger that pragmatism will turn into a discipline, just another one of the things people "do." James presented pragmatism, after all, not as a philosophy but as a way of doing philosophy. Pragmatism, in the most basic sense, is about how we think, not what we ought to think.
If we locate pragmatism within the broader picture of turn-of-the-century intellectual life, we can see it as a kind of knot in the tapestry, a pulling together of threads that reach into many other areas of thought, with many other consequences -- threads that, running back into the nineteenth century, include the emergence of theories of cultural pluralism and: political progressivism, the fascination with pure science and theory as a means for coping with randomness and uncertainty, the spread of historicist approaches to the study of culture, the rapid assimilation of the Darwinian theory of evolution, and the Emersonian suspicion of institutional authority. None of these developments is "pragmatist," but pragmatism was one of the places where they came into focus.
The threads that lead out of the pragmatist knot and into twentieth-century thought are as various as the threads that lead into it. Pragmatism served as a kind of philosophical tonic for many twentieth-century thinkers whom it would seem beside the point to call pragmatists. One of the most striking effects of the contemporary pragmatist revival is that a whole array of American (and non-American) writers has suddenly been placed in a new shared context. Cornel West, in The American Evasion of Philosophy (1990), uses pragmatism to show what people like James, W. E. B. Du Bois, Reinhold Neibuhr, and Lionel Trilling have in common, just as Rorty, in Philosophy and the Mirror uses pragmatism to show what people like Dewey, Martin Heidegger, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Jacques Derrida have in common, and Richard Poirier, in Poetry and Pragmatism (1992), uses it to show what Emerson, Robert Frost, and Gertrude Stein have in common. A complete list of American writers who have acknowledged the stimulus of pragmatism would be varied and long and would include, besides those just named, Wallace Stevens, Learned Hand, Benjamin Cardozo, Kenneth Burke, Sidney Hook, C. Wright Mills, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Tom Hayden, and Harold Bloom.
OF THE VARIOUS STRANDS EMERGING FROM the pragmatism of James and Dewey, four in particular lead into the cluster of concerns that have helped revive interest in pragmatism. One is the development of theories of cultural pluralism in response to the xenophobia induced by the turn-of-the-century waves of immigration and exacerbated by America's entry into the First World War. Three figures whose writing was seminal to this development were students of James and Dewey: "Horace" (1915) is often cited as the founding document of cultural pluralism; Alain Locke, who delivered his groundbreaking series of lectures "Race Contacts and Interracial Relations" at Howard University in 1915 and 1916; and Randolph Bourne, whose essay "Trans-National America" appeared in 1916.
Cultural pluralism owes most, in the pragmatist tradition, to James's A Pluralistic Universe (1909). One of the consequences of the pragmatic way of thinking, for James, was that the universe is better thought of as a "multi-verse," something that is never completed, never synthesized into a stable whole. Things are strung together, James argued, but their differences are never completely transcended. "Monism thinks that the all-form or collective-unit is the only form that is rational," said James. "Pluralism lets things really exist in the each-form or distributively."
James drew no particular political conclusions from his pluralism (though it undoubtedly had some connection with his impassioned anti-imperialism). But Kallen is multiple and unfinished, then society -- particularly an ethnically heterogeneous society like the United States in 1915 -- might be understood as multiple too. Of the three, Locke's argument involved the subtlest pragmatism: It was that although race has no real basis in biology, and although racial pride is in itself socially divisive, the only way to overcome social divisiveness was to foster racial pride -- to encourage the different ethnic groups in American society to take satisfaction in their different cultural practices. This is, Locke said, "only apparently paradoxical. It is not paradoxical when it is worked out in practice, because... the very stimulation to collective activity which race pride or racial self-respect may give will issue into the qualification test and the aim to meet that qualification test, which, of course, must be in terms of the common standard." In other words, the desire to be recognized as as good as everyone else -- to pass the ethnicity-blind meritocratic test, what Locke called "be recognized as different from even one else. You want to prove that your group is as good as even other group. Cultural pluralism is the recipe for civil cohesion, and the pragmatic beauty of the formulation is that neither human sameness nor human difference is made to seem essential.
A SECOND CONSEQUENCE OF TURN-OF-THE-century pragmatism was the revolution in American law and legal thinking inspired by the writings, and to some extent the personality, of Holmes. In old age -- he was sixty-one when he was appointed to the Supreme Court, in 1902, and he served until he was ninety -- Holmes became a hero to progressive political writers. He was himself a progressive only in a neutral sense. He didn't believe that social and economic reform could do more than shift a few burdens incrementally in one direction or another; he considered economic relations more or less fixed. But he saw no constitutional barrier to legislative attempts to move those burdens, by imposing taxes, passing health and safety regulations, or did believe in the powers of reform.
Holmes's belief in society's right to try out new forms of self-regulation followed from his belief, shared by all pragmatists, in the virtues of experimentation. If we learn by doing, we have to keep doing new things, since that is how knowledge progresses or at least adapts. This was the rationale for Holmes's most celebrated opinion as a judge, his dissent in Abrams v. U.S. (1919), in which he rejected state efforts to punish political opinion as a foreclosing of social possibilities. Even the Constitution, he said, "is an experiment, as all life is an experiment. Every year if not every day we have to wager our salvation upon some prophecy based upon imperfect knowledge. While that experiment is part of our system I think that we should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death."
Holmes's vibrant dissents in cases involving the regulation his death in the judicial acceptance of New Deal economic policies and in the establishment of the constitutional law of free speech. The argument of his jurisprudential writings -- that law is not merely a system of abstract doctrines but a response to changing conditions -- helped give rise to a series of fresh approaches to the law. These include the legal pragmatism of Roscoe Pound and Benjamin Cardozo, which emphasized the social aspect of legal reasoning and the experimental nature of judicial decision making; the legal realism of Karl Llewellyn and Jerome Frank, which regarded law sociologically and as an instrument of reform; Critical Legal Studies, which considers law as both a form of rhetoric and a form of politics; and the "law and economics" jurisprudence of Richard Posner, which proposes cost-benefit analysis as a basis for judicial decision making. All these ways of thinking about the law can be said to have grown from seeds planted in Holmes's 1897 essay "The Path of the Law."
A third strand that has recently around the turn of the century by John Dewey. That philosophy -- the theory that children "ream by doing" -- established itself long ago in the field of early-childhood education, but until the 1980s its relevance to undergraduate education seemed remote. Then, in an essay titled "Toward Pragmatic Liberal Education" in 1995, the historian Bruce A. Kimball argued that trends in undergraduate education since the 1960s reflect a move toward a pragmatic educational philosophy. For a century American higher education was dominated by the model of knowledge that obtains in research universities, where reaming is split up among separate scholarly disciplines, or departments; where the emphasis is on "knowledge for its own sake"; where a distinction between "facts" and "values" is rigorously observed; and where education is divorced from practical affairs. Kimball maintained that in smaller liberal arts colleges across the country, educators have been quietly abandoning the research model and have been adopting curricula in which reaming is oriented toward values, toward citizenship, toward virtue of "doing." This new model stresses "general education" -- that is, education designed for all students, rather than for future specialists in an academic field of inquiry -- and "liberal education" -- the education of temperament and sensibility. Whether the educators responsible for this shift in the paradigm of the college experience ever thought of themselves as pragmatists, it is clear that the developments Kimball traced are consistent with the pragmatic, particularly the Deweyan, tradition, and that if this movement ever becomes coherent and self-conscious enough to acquire a philosophical label, "pragmatist" is the obvious choice.
THE FINAL STRAND CONNECTING TURN-OF-THE-century pragmatism with its late-twentieth-century avatar may seem the most obvious, but it is in fact the oddest. This is the strand that runs through philosophy itself. James and Dewey regarded themselves as philosophers, but it is not hard to see how their dismissal of the traditional problems of philosophy made them seem, to many professional philosophers, enemies of the discipline. Pragmatism is every tendency to erect contingent knowledge into a formal system. To the extent that philosophy is an effort to erect what we know about how we know into a formal system, pragmatism can not help acting the role of termite -- undermining foundations, collapsing distinctions, deflating abstractions, suggesting that the real work of the world is being done somewhere other than in philosophy departments.
In spite of this, James and Dewey not only regarded themselves as philosophers but were, in their day, builders of philosophy departments -- James at Harvard and Dewey at Chicago and then Columbia. Thus there has been, ever since James's lecture "Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results" in 1898, a tradition of professional pragmatist philosophy, begun by students and colleagues of James and Dewey and running into the present.
Yet this line of philosophical pragmatists is not the line that connects James with Rorty and the contemporary pragmatist revival. That line runs, paradoxically, through the philosophical tradition that is usually regarded as the antagonist of the control of modern philosophy departments: analytic philosophy. Analytic philosophy is an overbroad term that embraces a number of philosophical movements since the rime of Bertrand Russell, including logical atomism, logical positivism, and the philosophy of language. The differences among these movements are, of course, important to their practitioners, but from the point of view of pragmatism, the notion they all share is that there is a distinctively philosophical method of analysis that can be used to get to the bottom of problems about mind, knowledge, meaning, truth, and so on.
This is the tradition in which Rorty found himself working when he first began teaching philosophy, after getting his degree from Yale. And although Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature can seem, from one point of view, an all-out attack on analytic philosophy, it was actually intended as the culmination of the whole tradition. "The aim of the book," Rorty explains, "is to undermine the reader's confidence in the mind' view, in knowledge' as something about which there ought to be a theory' and which has foundations,' and in philosophy' as it has been conceived since Kant." But, he continued, this argument was "parasitic upon the constructive efforts of the very analytic philosophers whose frame of reference I am trying to put into question.... I hope to convince the reader that... analytic philosophy... needs to be carried a few steps further. These additional steps will, I think, put us into a position to criticize the very notion of analytic philosophy,' and indeed of philosophy' itself."
Rorty thus proceeded to construct a kind of staircase out of analytic philosophy, made up of works that questioned a succession of fundamental tenets of the analytic approach. If he had stopped there, however, it is unlikely that a pragmatist revival would have followed, for Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature is, technically, just a piece of professional reigning philosophical paradigm left Rorty with no obvious paradigm within which to work next. Accepting the pragmatist analysis and seeing how it leads to different ways of conceiving of the traditional problems of analytic philosophy was a path chosen by one philosopher, Hilary Putnam, who has developed a philosophy he calls "pragmatic realism." But it was not the path chosen by Rorty.
The alternative to operating within a paradigm is to rely on your genius, and although Rorty has not ceased to repeat his analytic argument about the poverty of professional philosophy, since professional philosophers have not ceased to criticize it, he turned, after the publication of Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, to an unexpectedly imaginative engagement with literature, critical theory, political thought, and social commentary. He transformed himself, in short, from a philosopher into an intellectual. In this his model has clearly been Dewey. But Rorty is a far more exciting writer than Dewey, and his work has served for many people as a model for and public affairs that pragmatism might make possible.
AS JAMES DISCOVERED DURING HIS CRISIS OF 1870, pragmatism can encourage us to trust our own judgments, without ever assuming them to be infallible -- to have faith that if we do what is right, the metaphysics will take care of themselves. What pragmatism can not do, though, is to explain where our judgments come from. The easy answer to that question today is to say that our decisions are determined by the cultural "rules" of the social group we happen to belong to. No doubt the cultural rules explain a great deal of what people do, but different individuals in the same group make different judgments -- if they didn't, there would be nothing that needed explaining -- and in the end, as Holmes concluded, we can't say in any determinate way how we make our choices. They seem to arise, in the end, out of the mysteries of personality, which are a scandal to theory. All we naturally associated beings, a powerful social incentive to rationalize and justify the choices we make.
It is sometimes complained that pragmatism is a bootstrap theory -- that it can not tell us where we should want to go or how we can get there. The answer to this is that theory can never tell us where to go; only we can tell us where to go. Theories are just one of the ways we make sense of our need to get there. We wake up one morning and find ourselves in a new place, and then we build a ladder to explain how we got there. The pragmatist is the person who asks whether this is a good place to be. The nonpragmatist is the person who admires the ladder.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): William James in the 1890s. He published Pragmatism in 1907.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., around 1906.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): John PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): The **25;1028;TOOLONG intellectual Richard Rorty.
BY LOUIS MENAND

Louis Menand is a professor of English at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. This essay is adapted from his introduction to Pragmatism: A Reader, which is being published by Vintage this month.
// YOUR sweetheart of two years calls and asks that you meet him for dinner after work. You arrive at your favorite restaurant prepared for a romantic evening. He looks nervous. Maybe he's going to pop the question. But you're barely seated when he blurts out: "It's not working!" He's not the best communicator, you figure. So you sit there for two hours trying to work it out. You suggest going to his place for more privacy, but he doesn't think that's a good idea. He obviously has made up his mind. When you leave the restaurant, your heart sinks, again, because his body language tells you that it is truly over. But the biggest clue should have been when he told you that he met somebody else. How do you begin to pick up the pieces after such an emotional blow? The fact is, the act of breaking up is a process that's as old as time. But each time a person goes through a breakup, whether it it still feels like the first time, and people think they are never going to get over it. The good news is that you have healed from past hurts, and you will heal from this one. The human spirit is abundantly resilient. The key is to take time out for yourself to recover. Sisters, resist the urge to spend hours lying on the couch cuddled up with a gallon of ice cream while watching the cable channel that is dedicated to stories of scorned women who exact revenge on cheating ex-lovers. You don't want to get any ideas. Photograph After a breakup, experts urge men and women to quickly adjust by focusing on other parts of their lives. // Instead, go to a day spa (if funds are low, your bathroom can work just as well!), try yoga or kickboxing, or take a long fitness walk or run, all of which are great ways to combat stress and depression. How did you spend your time before the relationship? or to the movies. Join a club or take a class. Brothers, don't move on so quickly to the next girlfriend. You are not emotionally ready to jump into a new relationship, even though you think you are, says William Fredrick Cooper, author of Six Days in January, a novel that explores the heart of an AfricanAmerican man damaged by love. "Instead of taking time to be alone, many of us move into the next relationship without a hiatus, further adding to the dysfunction," Cooper says. "The joy is fleeting because the newness wears off and the mistakes from the past are often repeated. When you don't learn the lesson, the repercussions are more painful with each experience." In the end, the transitional woman winds up hurt and confused because her new man is emotionally unavailable. The man wonders why he continues to encounter the same kind of women and problems. The best way to avoid such patterns is to grieve the loss of a of a loved one, says Audrey B. Chapman, a therapist in private practice in Washington, D.C., who has written several best-selling relationship books, including Getting Good Loving: Seven Ways to Find Love and Make It Last. She says there are stages of loss that many people do not realize they must experience in order to move on. The stages, according to Chapman, are denial (You don't believe if s over. You wait for the phone to ring); anger or depression ("It's usually one or the other," Chapman says. "You want to work on the anger because it releases depression."); pain ("Once you start releasing the depression, you will feel pain and sadness," Chapman says. "This is all normal."); guilt and shame (Don't kick yourself because you missed red flags going into the relationship. Everyone makes mistakes.); bargain (This is when people try to get back together with (When you accept that if s over, you are ready to move on.). The phases can be thrown off course if you return to your ex in any fashion, whether it is talking to him or her on the telephone or hanging out with them with a group of friends. "You are not going to move through these phases very well at all if you continue to see or encounter the person," Chapman says. "That's why a lot of people don't get through a breakup or a loss, because they continue to be in touch with that individual. In order to get through it and get to the other side, you must grieve. You can't hold on to the person and grieve." Photograph When the relationship ends, relationship experts suggest reconnecting with friends and family, and spending time on other activities, including mentoring children. // If children are involved, you must be cordial to your ex for the sake of the children, but, such as having dinner or attending baseball games as a couple. It sends the wrong message to the child, who becomes hopeful that "mommy and daddy are getting back together." And it does not help you to move forward. To move forward, Cooper suggests what he calls "The Five R's" -relax, recover, reflect, resolve and resume. "Relax," Cooper says. "Put that telephone down. Don't call the next woman for companionship because your heart is broken. If I had a dollar for every time I saw a man do this, I'd be a millionaire. What are you afraid of? Give yourself some time to think, breathe and recharge your emotional batteries. Take that necessary timeout to be by yourself so that you can recover." During this time-out period, Cooper says, "it is necessary to reflect on the past. He advises men to take an honest look at the recently ended relationship and to look honestly at awesome," he says, "but what about the 22 or 21 or 20 hours of communication outside of the bedroom?" Additionally, Cooper suggests pondering whether the ex-partner was your best friend as well as an emotional nurturer and lover. Were there similar interests? What could have been done to avoid the breakup? What did I do wrong? After searching for answers to the above questions and others, both men and women should be able to resolve their personal issues. "Finding answers to what can or can not be controlled within the confines of love is a major part of the healing process," Cooper says. He adds that finding peace within your spirit can help you resume the process of sharing your life with someone special. "Brothers, always think optimistically when a relationship leaves us," Cooper says. "Instead of keeping it all inside and cultivating destructive tendencies, try this thought: "Hey, that woman was merely in the way of the queen who awaits me our hearts to deserving women. And when we give a Sister this, we close the chasm that exists between us and our queens-in-waiting."
Section: SPECTATOR'S JOURNAL Paplaka, Larvia

The name of this little village in western Latvia, the site of a Russian helicopter base, is suggestive of the Latvian word for collapse by deflation: saplaksana. "Paplaka" suggests partial deflation or sagging, like that of a mushroom past its prime.
My freelance television crew and I arrived in Paplaka and drove directly to the gray and dismal multi-story military housing that dominates this village of single-family dwellings. Most of the military apartments appeared empty, their windows broken or the panes covered with Russian newspapers. The Russians had simply gone -- no one had announced their departure, and no one mourned their passing. Once the target of demonstrations by local residents and independence activists, Paplaka was now strangely quiet. The gates to the base were open, and a plaque proclaiming the glory of Soviet aviators decorated an empty plinth.
We walked unhindered into a facility from which attack helicopters had once thundered over the landscape, frightening cattle, chickens, and children at all hours. Near the gates pants came up and introduced himself as "the unit commander." For the next hour, as we filmed, the Commander rambled amiably on and on about how "Latvians, Russians, Uzbeks, Gypsies, and everybody else are people who want to be happy, if only we all understood how we are all just people and part of the human race." The Russian officer was, as my Latvian girlfriend whispered, "s -- faced."
So were many of the others in a ragtag crew loading hampers, bookcases, and office desks onto two attack helicopters. An officer with a mustache like that of a czarist dragoon climbed aboard one of them, waving a fencing sword. Even as the choppers revved up, two men ran toward them, carrying heavy loads. Was it the last of the base's secret documents? To my eyes, the bags dramatically shoved aboard through the cockpit windows were bulging with -- potatoes. Or maybe onions. It was hard to see in, and spatters of mud.
A skeleton crew remained at the base, standing in the mud among fallen-down fences and vandalized shacks that once housed the mighty airmobile unit. Nearby, two trucks were loaded with pipes, radiators, and cement panels ripped from structures on the base. Perhaps they were headed for the huge scrap-metal foundry in nearby Liepaja, where we had just seen workers cannibalizing several armored personnel carriers.
A hundred yards away, in a steel-matted helicopter parking area now littered with smashed vehicles and the remains of a radar station, a Latvian farmer and his son calmly picked through the wreckage. They had driven in with a tractor and a small crane. "I let them in for a bottle of vodka. Let' em take what they want, what the hell," our ever-hospitable Commander remarked, back with us after disappearing for a few additional belts from the cognac bottle.
Another white-haired officer shrugged and said, "Both our people and your people local Latvians are carrying off whatever they can get their hands on."
It's getting harder and harder to decide whether to laugh or worry about the Russian military Gotterdammerung in the Baltic States. In places like Paplaka, once-haughty military units appear to have collapsed into barely disciplined bands of uniformed scavengers, vandals, and drunks. But that is only half the picture.
In many places, there is a spiteful violence to the Russian departure. I visited a barracks in Riga that was vandalized with an intensity that Russians almost never put into constructive work. Giant kettles in the mess hall appeared to have been pounded loose from their moorings in the concrete floor with some huge, blunt object. A short distance away, the ceramic tiles had been meticulously peeled from the wall for sale, but a stained-glass window depicting the Riga Old Town skyline was smashed. The entire library of the barracks -- a training center for construction troops -- was tossed in a heap on the floor, the bookshelves smashed to splinters. a port and naval base in western Latvia, the Russians appear to be abandoning a huge munitions dump containing tens of thousands of tons of obsolescent arms. How the local authorities will prevent thieves and scavengers from entering the dump, and how the potentially unstable ordnance will be disarmed, isn't Russia's problem anymore.
Tales of wholesale vandalism also come from Estonia. Journalists recently visiting the large submarine base at Paldiski reported scuttled warships and bizarre attempts to burn buoys and docks. It will cost Estonia huge sums simply to clean up the Paldiski harbor and to ascertain that no radioactive, toxic, or explosive materials have been dumped there. The demolition apparently started just weeks after Russia indicated to Estonia that it wanted to keep Paldiski as a strategic base even after other forces were withdrawn.
It is no surprise, then, that at some Russian bases the reception extended to unannounced visitors is less than cordial. In July, a squad of Russian marines in bulletproof vests surrounded the car I was riding Russians locked and loaded their Kalashnikov assault rifles. Their commander, Captain Third Rank Aleksandr Zhebrik, demanded to know where our video camera and cassette were. We were intruders on Russian soil, he declared, and after a check of ID papers, the Russian officer announced that my Latvian cameraman and assistant could be summarily shot, while 1, a "foreigner," could be thrown into the kartser, the solitary detention cell used in Gulag camps.
The incident was a sobering example of what some of the Russian military thought of Latvian sovereignty nearly a year after the nation regained its independence in the wake of the August coup. Russian forces in the Baltic continue to operate under vague but sinister orders authorizing the use of arms against any threats or "insults" to Russian soldiers, their families, or the "honor" of the Russian military. For every tipsy, merry Russian, there are others who are ready, willing, and able to shoot to kill to protect what they see officers and their subordinates bring to mind the fall of another imperial ruling class in the Baltics -- the Germans. In the wake of the German Empire's defeat in World War I, the Baltic German gentry, like today's Russian colonists, were threatened by the aspirations of the indigenous Baltic peoples for independence and democracy. Within weeks of the Armistice, and using the Bolshevik Revolution as a (possibly legitimate) excuse, German officers and the local aristocracy ignored the end of hostilities in Europe to start a Freikorps -- a military force no longer under the control of the German state.
Although the Freikorps cooperated with Latvian forces in running out the Bolsheviks, it was clear that they intended to return German rule to the Baltics -- if not with Berlin's support, then in the form of an autonomous German-ruled Baltic state. Besides strictly military activities, the Freikorps also raised funds to support itself and purported to offer the reward of colonial homesteads on Baltic soil to its recruits.
With a government the Baltics, the Russian colonists are in a position like that of the Baltic Germans in late 1918, and they harbor strikingly similar attitudes. For instance, Russian demands for "human rights" in the form of automatic Baltic citizenship and Russian as a second official language echo demands made in 1919 that the German language be given official status in Latvia, that the privileges of the landed aristocracy be preserved, and that ethnic German units be formed in the Latvian military.
If the Russian soldiers were looting simply for cash to buy homes when they returned to Russia, most Latvians would say, "Good riddance." But their spite and chauvinism lend credence to suspicions that many of them are building up "war chests" to underwrite renewed Russian domination of the Baltic nations. "All this talk that military property would be sold or leased to create a fund for returning soldiers is just talk," says Auseklis Plavins, a spokesman for Latvia's Defense Ministry. "We're talking about deals"
One of the most spectacular arms deals conducted in violation of Latvian sovereignty -- though apparently in accordance with Russian law -- was the September 19 delivery of a Kilo-class submarine to Iran. The sub sailed from the Bolderaja naval base at the mouth of Riga harbor with a crew consisting largely of Russians paid up to $40 a day for their services in delivering the vessel to the Gulf. It is probably not the last such deal, since a number of Iranians remained on the Russian base in Latvia, waiting for a second, and, possibly, a rumored third submarine.
Latvian Deputy Defense Minister Valdis Pavlovskis says Russian officers and retired military personnel in Latvia are also engaged in a wide range of activities aimed at subverting Latvia's independence. Pamphlets urging a return of "Soviet power" in Latvia have been printed at Russian army printing facilities. There are regular meetings of Russian veterans and paramilitary organizations and clubs that suggest a whole infrastructure of "civilian" support for the neo-Freikorps is being organized loud, bizarre demonstration in front of Latvia's parliament by aging Russian hags and bemedalled geezers on behalf of Igor Parfyanov, a leader of the dread OMON paramilitary police, who was put on trial in September. The shrill senior citizens bellowed that Latvia was "Russian soil" and that Latvians were "fascists" who should be shot or deported. Igor Lopatin, a retired Soviet officer and a former leader of the banned hard-line Interfront, has founded a new Communist organization in Latvia, skirting the ban on the former Soviet Communist party imposed in the wake of the August coup.
I. Berezutsky, the commander of Naval Unit 69422 in Mangalusala, where I was held at gunpoint last July, is said by Defense Ministry officials to have been an ardent supporter of the August 1991 putsch. Three amphibious BTR60BP armored personnel carriers used by the OMON are still reportedly hidden somewhere at his facility. Captain Zhebrik's marines, who chatted with my crew when the initial tension passed, freely admitted they had been not to reinforce its troops in the Baltic states.
These days, when the Western powers inform the Baltic countries that they have no alternative but to learn to live with their former colonizers, incredulous locals can only wonder: On whose terms?
As we closed this issue, Russia announced that it was suspending withdrawal of the 130,000 troops still in the Baltics. -- Ed.

ILLUSTRATIONS:
by Juris Kaza

Juris Kaza is an American journalist based in Stockholm

Section: THE PUBLIC POLICY The pharmaceutical "crisis" is a Washington invention.
Presidential election years are good for political consultants and bad for the rest of us, who bear the brunt of the usual policy "reforms" emanating from Washington, D.C. So it is this year with pharmaceuticals.
Concern about the nation's rising prescription drug bill has set off the usual flurry in the nation's capital. Unfortunately, the tenor of the "debate" is reflected in the presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore turned from attacking "Big Oil" to trashing drug makers. The industry, he claimed, is "gouging the consumer" and engaging in "corporate chutzpah." But, he proudly proclaimed, "I have taken on the pharmaceutical companies for nearly a quarter century now."
Congress is consumed by similar maneuvering for political advantage. The result is awful policy on both sides. Conservative Republicans on Capitol Hill readily admit that the competing legislation is shaped more by polls than facts: The GOP proposal "is damage control, You hope this bill stops you from getting killed politically."
The biggest complaint about prescription drugs is their cost, even though Americans devote more money to alcohol and almost as much to tobacco. Last year overall pharmaceutical spending increased by 17.4 percent, creating the perception of runaway prices -- and corresponding political pressure for government action.
But that increase is in total outlays, not average prices. The primary reasons the former increased, points out Laura Dummit of the General Accounting Office, are growth in pharmaceutical coverage by private insurance plans, the number of new drugs entering the market, and overall consumption. Drug prices have increased less swiftly, and even those estimates are flawed; they reflect sampling problems, fail to account for the increased role of generics, and ignore falling prices for newer medicines and improved drug quality.
A related criticism is that drugs cost more in the U.S. than in other countries. Politicians have organized well-publicized bus trips to Canada to allow constituents to purchase pharmaceuticals at lower cost too much in this nation," claims Sen. Jim Jeffords (R-Vermont).
However, prices overseas generally reflect the relative poverty of some states and the highly politicized nature of most foreign health care systems. Moreover, despite the highly publicized anomalies, controls save little money. In the most detailed analysis available (using 1992 data), researchers Patricia Danzon and Jeong Kim report "that the average U.S. consumer would have paid 3 percent more in Canada, 27 percent more in Germany, 30 percent less in France, 9 percent less in Italy, 8 percent less in Japan, 44 percent more in Switzerland, 9 percent more in Sweden, and 24 percent less in the UK."
Other governments can hold down prices only by wrecking their pharmaceutical markets; U.S. firms become their escape valve. As Bill McArthur, a physician with Canada's Fraser Institute, admits: "In effect, Canada must steal U.S. research and development to maintain itself." But if Washington responded by similarly their primary incentive to make new products: Unless someone pays for the development of drugs, no one will develop them.
Unfortunately, though drugs generate enormous benefits, they do not come cheap. U.S. pharmaceutical firms will spend about $26.4 billion on research and development this year alone. Critics complain that companies devote even more money to administration and marketing, but as a share of sales, drug makers put more into R &D; than does the medical industry generally, or companies that produce computer software, electronics, automobiles, or military hardware. Anyway, price controls would actually create a greater incentive to sell more of existing products and create fewer new ones.
The industry figures it costs on average more than a half billion dollars to produce each successful drug. Companies generally winnow 5,000 to 10,000 potential substances down to just one marketable drug. And 70 percent of drugs sold are estimated to lose money.
Drug development is never likely to be cheap. But unnecessarily strict regulation by the FDA makes as double the cost of new drug development. Despite recent reforms, a Competitive Enterprise Institute poll found that huge majorities of doctors (including 77 percent of oncologists) believed the agency was still too slow in approving new products, and that strong majorities believed Americans were dying as a result.
Political pressure to act on drug prices largely emanates from the elderly, since Medicare generally does not cover pharmaceuticals. One congressional proposal would allow importation of U.S.-produced drugs from other countries; another would forbid any company from selling drugs for different prices anywhere in the world. Both measures would effectively subject American firms to price controls imposed by overseas governments.
But debate so far has focused on adding a drug benefit to Medicare. The administration (including candidate Al Gore) and the GOP Congress (but not candidate George W. Bush) have offered plans with ten-year costs of $253 billion and $155 billion, respectively. These proposals, complains Rep. Mark Sanford, "represent a bidding war for votes."
There expansion of social programs is that party's constant goal. Far more uncomfortable are many Republicans. One press secretary explained to me in detail how pleased his conservative boss was with the GOP proposal, sentiments those who have talked with other members of the congressman's staff know to be false. Most GOP staffers and legislators simply refuse to go on the record.
In fact, there's no crisis. According to analysts William Orzechowski and Robert Walker, 70 percent of the elderly spend less than $500 a year on pharmaceuticals; only about four percent spend more than $2,000 a year. Many of them are not needy and more than two-thirds of seniors have some coverage for prescription drugs.
Moreover, the congressional proposals have numerous holes. The Democrats intend to rely upon pharmaceutical benefit management programs, which have not prevented sharp prescription drug price increases for HMOs. The Democratic initiative would also encourage seniors to abandon private pharmaceutical coverage. The plan offers first-dollar coverage (no deductible), but with a total The measure appears to be preeminently political: offer universal coverage, to hook all seniors on government assistance, with miserly benefits, low enough to keep initial budget estimates down but that could be easily expanded in the future.
Alas, the GOP's stand-alone drug benefit risks "adverse selection"; that is, those who use the most medications would be most likely to take the coverage. In addition, unlike under normal health insurance policies, increased drug expenses could not be counterbalanced by reductions in other treatment costs. Indeed, some Republicans are scathing in private. The GOP proposal "is not based on reality," complained one staffer. Another said: "Will it ever work in real life? No." A leading conservative congressman denounced "the plan as designed in Oz." Its dubious assumptions, he said, "were just flat out wishful thinking."
Like all government health programs, a new drug benefit would inflate demand and thus spending. As costs rose,, the Comptroller General has testified that price controls would be necessary to maintain the solvency of any drug benefit program.
The administration has formally rejected such restrictions, but it has criticized the industry for high prices and threatened to push restrictions if its proposal is defeated; it also proposed, and then dropped, under legislative pressure, a plan to cut Medicare reimbursement for cancer drugs (a limited exception to the lack of any drug benefit).
In fact, both Medicaid and Medicare were originally fee-for-service plans to which price controls were later added. And the federal government already regulates some drug prices. In 1990 Congress set up the Federal Supply Schedule (FSS), which mandates a discount of at least 15 percent, up to the best price offered any private purchaser, for non-Medicare federal health care programs. As a result, industry discounts to other buyers fell substantially: Legislators shifted rather than cut costs.
Nevertheless, pending legislation would mandate that drug makers extend to Medicare recipients the same FSS. But the FSS works because it remains limited; expanding it to Medicare would increase firms' revenue loss, making them more reluctant to participate in FSS. Drug makers would also become more hesitant to grant any discounts to any purchaser.
Medicaid, which effectively imposes price controls through FSS, also uses formularies to regulate use. On average it takes 20 months after FDA approval for a pharmaceutical to be added to the Medicaid formulary. Less than half of new drugs are made available to Medicaid recipients during the first four years. Similar problems afflict Veterans Administration patients.
Unfortunately, states are also beginning to play the price control game. In May, Maine passed complicated legislation to roll back drug prices. Several other states are considering similar laws.
The potential for disaster is clear. If the federal or state governments had tightly controlled prices, profits, and use of pharmaceuticals in the 1980's, numerous breakthrough drugs would never have been developed, limiting the treatment of everything from cancer owe their lives to profit-making drug firms.
Rising pharmaceutical prices pose a problem, but one largely limited to the very small number of people who earn little but spend much. They should receive aid; Washington, D.C. is not, however, the place to start. For instance, in 1998 drug makers gave away 2.8 million prescriptions worth an estimated $500 million. And as the American Legislative Exchange Council points out in a new study, more than 20 states already have senior pharmaceutical assistance programs designed to help the indigent elderly.
Private Medigap coverage, too, could better meet this need if the federal government did not require policies to reimburse routine expenditures. For the same amount of money, existing policies could be reconfigured to provide the benefits that Medicare recipients most need. Finally, as the Institute for Policy Innovation points out, the federal government could help everyone by loosening FDA control of pharmaceutical development, thereby reducing costs.
As for the elderly, Washington should cover pharmaceuticals as part of George W. Bush. Rep. William Thomas (R-Calif.), chairman of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, and Democratic Sen. John Breaux of Louisiana led a majority of members of the Commission on Medicare Reform in proposing to allow beneficiaries to choose among competing plans. Providing Medicare vouchers to the elderly would allow them to select coverage that included a prescription benefit, while avoiding the problem of adverse selection. One conservative staffer acknowledges that "we should be pushing for Breaux-Thomas," since any stand-alone plan would be a second-best solution.
But that was never going to happen this year. Complained another GOP congressional aide: "I guess the attitude now is let's punt till the next Congress. Then President Bush and a Republican Congress can deal with it." Which, of course, assumes a President Bush and GOP Congress.
Economic prosperity, scientific discovery, and technological innovation have all combined in the form of pharmaceuticals to offer new hope for the sick. Congress should follow the injunction would yield little financial relief for consumers or the government, but would deny everyone the medicines that have done so much to save and improve lives.
Admittedly, standing for principle could prove politically costly. But a GOP unwilling to fight for anything is unworthy of reelection; as one Republican staffer observed, "being Clinton-lite doesn't make it a better idea." As tempting as it might be for Congress to adopt a quick-fix measure, ill-considered action today would generate counterproductive consequences for Americans for years to come.
By Doug Bandow

Doug Bandow is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute

Section: COLLEGE AVENUE
THIS PAST SPRING, Stanley Rothman, S. Robert Lichter, and Neil Nevitte published a statistical study ("Politics and Professional Advancement among College Faculty," The Forum: Vol. 3: No. 1, Article 2) that argued for the presence of widespread ideological discrimination in higher education. The study surveyed 1,643 faculty members across the United States and found "that liberals and Democrats outnumber conservatives and Republicans by large margins." Rothman et al. also found that conservatives and Republicans "teach at lower quality schools than do liberals and Democrats." The authors concluded that "complaints of ideologically-based discrimination in academic advancement deserve serious consideration and further study."
Scholars Barry Ames, David C. Barker, Chris W. Bonneau, and Christopher J. Carman responded with a critique of that study ("Hide the Republicans, the Christians, and the Women: A Response to 'Politics and Professional Advancement Among College Faculty,'" The Forum: Vol. 3: No. 2, Article 7), challenging the inference of discrimination and offering discrimination but from selfselection.
Self-selection is a deeply flawed explanation for the prevailing ideological imbalance on college campuses. Here's the authors' alternative hypothesis, followed by my analysis:
We offer self-selection as the likely culprit. First, there may be a rural/urban divide driving the relationship. Conservatives may want to live in communities whose ideological climate is more consistent with their own belief structure. Thus, given the strong correlation observable between the metropolitan density of a particular county and the mean conservatism of its citizens, it would not be surprising if conservatives, academic or otherwise, prefer to work in smaller, more rural areas.
Second, regional selection affects hiring. It is no secret that Midwesterners and, especially, Southerners are more conservative, more religious, and less Jewish than Northeasterners.
Third, many conservatives may deliberately choose not to seek employment at top-tier research universities because they object, on philosophical grounds, to one of the fundamental tenets undergirding such institutions: the scientific method.. in large part from an embrace of Christian fundamentalism as a dominant worldview. Fundamentalism, by definition, is an absolutist, "faith-based" allegiance to a particular dogma, the veracity of which is considered beyond question or argument.. In other words, the faith based reasoning of Christian fundamentalism (and by extension, of most socio-cultural conservatives) is essentially incompatible with the mission of contemporary research universities.
The authors offer no evidence to support these explanations, which, on examination, are unpersuasive. I will consider each element in turn. Rural/Urban Divide: The authors argue that conservatives prefer to live in more rural areas and so will be disproportionately found at schools in such areas. If this is so, then an easy test of the hypothesis presents itself. My beloved alma mater Dartmouth College is one of two rural institutions in the Ivy League (Cornell is the other). It is also in New Hampshire, historically the most conservative of the northeastern states. If the authors are correct about more conservatives on the Dartmouth faculty than at urban-situated Ivy League schools, such as Harvard, Columbia, Penn, or Brown. A recent examination of party identification, however, finds that 66 percent of Dartmouth professors are Democrats and the ratio of registered Democrats to Republicans is 12.5 to 1, comparable to the ratios at urban Ivy League and other elite institutions. This is just one data point, of course, but it casts doubt on the idea that conservative academics have an unusual pro-rural preference. The situation at the University of Chicago, a rare institution with a historic reputation for a conservative presence, suggests that there exist counter-examples in the opposite direction as well. Regional Selection: The authors argue that the South is disproportionately conservative, and as a result, conservatives might self-select for Southern schools. Again, the testable hypothesis here is that elite schools in the South should attract a disproportionate number of faculty conservatives relative to similarly prestigious schools in more liberal areas of the country. The only case study I unquestionably one of the most prestigious institutions in the South. But according to one survey of eight of Duke's humanities departments ("DCU sparks varied reactions," The Chronicle Online, February 10, 2004), Duke has 142 registered Democrats and eight registered Republicans (17.75 to 1). The Duke History Department pitched a 32-0 Democratic shutout. Again, this is just one sample and only of humanities departments, but it lends little support for the conclusion that conservative professors are disproportionately drawn from and prefer to remain in the South. More generally, do we really think that rural Midwestern small colleges (the three factors the authors identify) like Oberlin, Grinnell, and Kenyon are overrun with conservative faculty? Willingness to Apply the Scientific Method: The fact that the authors would propose this explanation, seemingly with a straight face, is evidence of the straw-grasping going on here. But I will treat it as a serious hypothesis for the sake of argument. The authors argue that conservatism draws from fundamentalist. Again, this is subject to testing. If conservatives are hostile to the scientific method, then the disparity in ideology should be greatest in those fields where the scientific method is strongest -- mathematics and hard sciences. By contrast, the gap should be narrower where the scientific method is least relevant, such as in the humanities.
Again, the available data do not seem to support this hypothesis. In fact, the ideological gap is much narrower in those fields where the scientific method is most relevant. Consider this summary by Yevgeny Vilensky (April 6, 2005, blogger.com) of another study, which found the following ratios of liberal/conservative identifications among faculty members in math and science departments:
Mathematics: 4.1 to 1
Physics: 6 to 1
Chemistry: 2.2 to 1
Biology: 4.4 to 1
Computer Science: 2.8 to 1
Engineering: 2.6 to 1
Economics: 1.4 to 1
In the humanities and social science departments, the following divides were found: 7.7 to 1
Philosophy: 16 to 1
Theology/Religion: 16.6 to 1
Political Science: 40.5 to 1
Sociology: 8.6 to 1
Psychology: 10.5 to 1
So, the ideological divide is much narrower in the fields where the scientific method is used (including Economics), and widest where it is most absent. More fundamentally, Ames et al. are simply incorrect to argue that the religious beliefs of conservatives make them unable to apply the scientific method. As Larry Summers of Harvard learned the hard way, modern-day political correctness is a faith just as strong as, if not stronger than, religious faith. Summers's great heresy was to suggest that certain faith-based tenets of the modern academy could be subjected to testing by the scientific method. Make no mistake about it: The orthodoxy of political correctness is just as at odds with the scientific method as traditional religious belief. The only difference, of course, is that traditional religion is shunned in the modern academy, while THE AUTHORS ALSO CLAIM that "it is difficult even to imagine ideological discrimination occurring at the point of hiring." This navet demonstrates the authors' blind spot occasioned by their own narrow worldview. There is a multitude of ways in which ideological discrimination manifests itself in hiring. The most obvious is simply the degree of skepticism that incumbent faculty apply to a given scholar's work. If they disagree with the ideological conclusions of the work, liberal faculty approach it with greater skepticism and a higher burden of proof, and thereby it is easier to conclude that the analysis is flawed or incomplete. Again, this difference is reflected in the fact that the more subjective subjects (Philosophy, History, English, etc.) have greater ideological disparities than less subjective subjects where standards of scholarly rigor are better established and have an independent integrity that separates the craftsmanship of the field from the conclusions.
I would say that if there is self-selection here, it is of precisely one type -- libertarian and conservative students self-select aware of the political obstacles that will be placed in their way. It is also likely that conservatives, even if not blocked by discrimination, are disproportionately turned off by the fundamental "unseriousness" of the modern academy: the emptiness and triviality of so much modern scholarship (especially in the humanities), the restraints on free inquiry, the whole edifice of the diversity machine.
When it comes to addressing the issue of other "underrepresented minorities" on college campuses, college administrators do not simply throw up their hands and complain of a shallow talent pool. At Columbia, for instance, the diversity committee is "tasked with finding ways to strengthen the pipeline bringing women and minority students into the University's undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral programs."
I think it is time to take even a small percentage of those tens of millions being spent at places like Columbia and conduct a study of the causes of the ideological disparity in the academy, rather than simply speculate and pontificate. At of the more preposterous hypotheses -- such as self-selection -- for the under-representation of conservatives in academia.
By Todd Zywicki

Todd Zywicki is professor of law at George Mason University School of Law, member of the board of trustees of Dartmouth College, and blogs at the Volokh Conspiracy, www.volokh.com.
Celebrated composer and teacher Olivier Messiaen died in his sleep after surgery at a Paris hospital on May 5. He was 83. Messiaen's lifelong sense of curiosity, his masterful and provocative sense of orchestration and color and his intense religious poetics all profoundly influenced Western music since World War II. Messiaen was born in 1908 in Avignon, France, to a cultured family (his father translated English literature, his mother was the poet Cecile Sauvage). He played the piano and composed from his earliest years, and entered the Paris Conservatory at age 11, where he later took first prize in organ, improvisation and composition. In 1930 he became organist at the Trinity Church in Paris, a position he held, except for a wartime interruption, until 1972. In the later 1930s he taught at the pre-university level. A Roman Catholic and a mystic, from the beginning of his compositional career in the late 1920s Messiaen intended his music to express his religious feelings. During the 1930s he discovered and developed the principal rhythmic, harmonic and coloristic features that character. His early "Theme and Variations" (1931) for violin and piano, although tonal and quite impressionistic, already anticipates aspects of his later music: harmonic "added notes," Messiaen's peculiar modal flavoring, the prominent tritone, cluster-like colors, quick changing chords and registral extremes, prolonged repetition, a ceaseless pounding accompaniment and a rapturous climax. Singly or together these elements occur in all of Messiaen's religious works during the 1930s and '40s, including his many orchestral and organ compositions, chiefly Apparition de L eglise eternelle (1932), L'ascension (1933, 34), La nativite' du Seigneur (1935) and Les corps glorieux (1939). While serving as a French army hospital attendant in 1940, Messiaen was taken prisoner by the Nazis. He was imprisoned until 1942 in Stalag VIII, Gorlitz, Silesia. During his internment he wrote Quartet for the End of Time (1941) for the four instruments available in the camp: clarinet, violin, noted work. Reports suggest that its first performance in front of the camp's 5,000 or so prisoners, with Messiaen at the piano, was overwhelming. Messiaen himself said that the prisoners were the best audience he ever had. The quartet represents an especially successful amalgam of what would seem to be disparate if not contradictory material and influences. The work is packed with technical ideas that Messaien explains and illustrates in his two-volume treatise The Technique of My Musical Language (1944), including rhythmic formulas from provinces of India modified and embellished according to imposed "rules," as well as symmetrical scales that he calls "modes of limited transposition." In addition to these technical ideas, however, the quartet was written "in homage to the Angel of the Apocalypse, who raises his hand toward the heavens saying: 'There will be no more Time.'" The score is accompanied with elaborate program notes explaining, from movement to movement, its deeply religious message. As if that weren't enough, of his lifelong interests. For Messiaen, birds were "God's little messengers," and their songs occupy a prominent place in much of his music. He transcribed and quoted in his works bird songs of over 250 species. The first movement of the quartet "Liturgy of Crystal" illustrates something of Messiaen's compositional style. The piano sounds a repeating series of chords and a repeating rhythmic series. Because the two series are of unequal number they grow out of phase, and one does not hear a single repeated pattern, although the material always sounds "similar." The rhythmic series derives from "Hindu" rhythmic formulas and the chords from one of Messiaen's specially devised scales -- or "modes." The cello's repeating rhythmic formula and "melody" are similarly derived. Together the piano and cello represent a natural "scene." The clarinet, using its own scalar "mode," represents a blackbird, or a nightingale, and the violin various birds in the scene Between three and four in the morning the birds awaken; a blackbird or a nightingale improvises in a cloud of sonorous dust, with a halo of trills lost high in the trees. Transpose this to a religious plane: you have the harmonious silence of Heaven. "The Quartet ends with an emotionally charged slow duet for violin and piano, written yet in another of Messiaen's 'modes.'" Of this movement Messiaen wrote: "It is concerned especially with... Jesus the Man, of the Word made flesh, resurrected to communicate his life to us. it is all Love. Its slow rise to the final phrase is the ascension of Man toward his God, of the son of God toward his Father, of the divine creature toward Paradise." The quartet demonstrates how Messiaen's mystical and poetic concerns transcend his technical preoccupations to achieve a unique form of 20th-century religious music. After his repatriation Messiaen taught harmony and analysis at the Paris Conservatory, and in 1943 he also began teaching private composition attracted the likes of pianist Yvonne Loriod (who later a became his wife), as well as the young composers Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen and Iannis Xenakis. Later Messiaen was allowed to teach composition at the conservatory, although he was not appointed professor of composition until 1966. His new ideas on rhythm and harmony seemed to galvanize young composers trying to escape pre-World War II musical styles and ideas. In the 1940s and '50s his courses and lectures were sought after by young composers, and he was invited to teach, among other places, at Berkshire Music Center in Tanglewood. Messiaen's music attracted international attention in the late 1940s. During that period the composer's Turangalila-Symphonie (1948) was commissioned and was performed several times by prominent orchestras, while his solo and chamber music was being presented regularly by some of the world's finest musicians and ensembles. The symphony, a highly colorful ten movement, 90-minute work, is considered one of Messiaen's most popular, and was used as '60s. In 1949 and'' 50 Messiaen, along with his younger colleagues and students, explored new notions of serialism in music based on Schanberg's 12-tone theories, some of which he incorporated into his earlier rhythmic and harmonic ideas. This effort resulted in the influential Quatre e'tudes de rythme (1949), as well as the Livre d'orgue (1951) and later Chronochromie (1960). His continued interest in bird songs inspired a number of works, including Re'veil des oiseaux (1953), Oiseaux exotiques (1956) and Caralogue d'oiseaux (1958). The last work is a mammoth collection of piano solos that presents the songs of at least 70 different birds, along with musical portrayals of their natural habitat. Messiaen continued to express his religious concerns throughout his career. Significant religious works written after the Quartet for the End of Time include Visions de l'amen (1943), Trois petites liturgies de la Pre'sence Divine (1944), Vingt regards sur l' enfant Jesus (1944) and Et exspecto resurrectionem mortuorum (1964). In addition to his many commissions Messiaen received numerous official honors and tokens of recognition from the French government, as well as various musical foundations and organizations, and, most uniquely, the municipal council of Parowan, Utah, which resolved in 1978 to name a local mountain Mt. Messiaen. The composer had written his Des Canyons aux Etoiles ("From the Canyons to the Stars") in 1974 in Parowan. Messiaen's stature continued to rise in his later years, and his only opera, St. Francois d'Assise, was hailed at its premier in 1983. His final large work Eclairs sur l'AuDela ("Reflections on the Hereafter") was finished in 1991, and is scheduled to receive its first performance in November by the New York Philharmonic. The author chairs the department of musicianship studies and composition at the School of Music at DePaul University in Chicago. His music can be heard on Finnadar records.
THE LAST BOOK that Jonathan Edwards prepared for publication sports an ornery title: Two Dissertations. (I) Concerning the End for which GOD created the World. (II) The Nature of True Virtue. Nor is this work memorable in others ways that often distinguish religious "classics." It does not possess the personal intensity of Thomas a Kempis's Imitation of Christ or Pascal's Pensees nor the compelling narrative of, say, Malcolm Muggeridge's Chronicle of Wasted Time. To complicate matters, the two parts of the book have often been published separately. Finally, it is filled with rarefied argument, abstractions abound, and many pages of Concerning the End for which GOD created the World sail through heavy seas of concentrated biblical citation. This is, in other words, not the kind of volume to be measured in a 700-word review or one whose author would be a likely candidate for the call-in shows. Still, a fairly simple conviction drives its recondite argumentation. The reason for the pairing of the two essays has been neatly summarized by the decade or so of his life to preparing this work and several of Edwards's related writings for publication. According to Ramsey, the propensity of earlier publishers to bring out the treatises separately betrayed a fundamental misunderstanding of their inner connection: "The "end" for which God created the world must be the "end" of a truly virtuous and holy life" (The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Vol. B: Ethical Writings, Yale University Press, 1989). Edwards, though he spins out definitions and considers objections with exhaustive patience, nonetheless can also make his case succinctly. For Part I: "All that is ever spoken of in the Scripture as an ultimate end of God's works is included in that one phrase," the glory of God''. "For Part II: "It is evident that true virtue must chiefly consist in love to God; the Being of beings, infinitely the greatest and best of beings." In other words, the world purposes, especially the happiness of the human creature, are subordinate to that one great end. Correspondingly, genuine virtue is found only in deeds motivated by a heart captured by the divine glory. While "secondary" or "natural" virtue -- like deeds motivated by love of family, country or friends -- is found among all humans, only those whom God has drawn into the kingdom may approach "true virtue," because only they do good deeds in order to glorify God. From these summaries, it is quickly apparent that the major impediment to considering Edwards's Two Dissertations a "classic" is not its abstruse style but its blunt contradiction of the ruling assumptions of our day. Where we are now into diversity, Edwards is abrasively particularistic -- virtue will be defined in one way, or it is not virtue. Where we are preoccupied with the creature, Edwards is besotted with the Creator -- God as the Being of beings defines his own place in the cosmos along with the places our ability to preserve our planet, Edwards is blithely optimistic about the future -- he is convinced of the eternality, no less than the infinity, of the divine goodness; he does not doubt for an instant that the Being of Beings will prevail. Edwards made sure that no one would miss his message. He concluded Concerning the End by pairing a contentious conviction that was already controversial in his own day with a piercing affirmation of the sort that has left admirers -- from his pupils Samuel Hopkins and Joseph Bellamy to savants among our contemporaries like Ramsey, Sang Lee and Robert Jenson -- breathless: "God aims at satisfying justice in the eternal damnation of sinners; which will be satisfied by their damnation, considered no otherwise than with regard to its eternal duration. But yet there never will come that particular moment, when it can be said, that now justice is satisfied. But if this don't satisfy our modern freethinkers, who don't like the talk about satisfying justice with an infinite punishment that God, in glorifying the saints in heaven with eternal felicity, aims to satisfy his infinite grace or benevolence, by the bestowment of a good infinitely valuable, because eternal; and yet there never will come the moment, when it can be said, that now this infinitely valuable good has been actually bestowed." For its boldness in affirming a God-centered vision of the universe -- and even more, a God-centered rendering of the human condition -- Edwards's Two Dissertations remains one of the most striking works of modern religious thought. Concerning the End is made up of two parts. First comes an argument from the nature of things contending that, if we take for granted that the cosmos had a creator, we must also take for granted that the ultimate purpose of the cosmos is the Creator's own praise. While the metaphysically minded may find such reasoning impressive, most Christian readers will probably be more deeply moved by the extensive range of scripture that Edwards discusses in the second part. These are glory, "for my name's sake," and related terms. The range and diversity of such passages from both testaments is even more impressive than Edwards's learned discussion of them. In the Yale edition, Ramsey shows how Edwards first gathered such passages out of concordances early in his ministerial career during the 1720s, and continued to mull them over, classify them and steep himself in their implications for another 30 years before writing Concerning the End. A similar process of note-taking, trial argumentation and private meditation on the work of contemporary ethicists lies behind The Nature of True Virtue. (Yale's forthcoming publication of Edwards's Miscellanies, which contain the bulk of those private annotations, will offer profoundly rewarding insights into the development of Edwards's thought.) In The Nature of True Virtue Edwards responds specifically to what historian Norman Fiering has called the "new moral philosophy" of the 18th century -- that is, the sentimental ethics that was sweeping the English-speaking world in the works of the Earl) and Samuel Clarke (1675-1720). In just a few pages (only 88 pages in the Yale edition), Edwards raises the polemical stakes very high. He argues, first, that the conclusions of the new moralists are true, but only in their proper place. Because God has communicated certain aspects of his own image to all humanity, Edwards agrees with the philosophers of benevolence that natural conscience possesses a prudential value in regulating conduct, that sentiments of symmetry and beauty provide insights into the nature of human morality, that pity and familial affection stabilize society, and that a natural "moral sense" reveals some truths about the ethical world. Second, however, Edwards insists that the socially useful benefits of natural virtue fall far short of true virtue. For Edwards, the unshakable foundation of virtue worthy of the name is "that supreme regard to God, and love to him laid as the foundation, and all other virtues handled in a connection with this, and in subordination to it he had previously asserted for the inner spiritual life in his Treatise on Religions Affections (1746) and for conversion in his Freedom of the Will (1754) -no truly good thing, strictly speaking, exists that is not always and everywhere dependent upon God. Third, and in his most complicated argument, Edwards tries to show that the virtue described by the new moral philosophers -- where individuals are drawn by natural capacities to love the beautiful and pursue the good -- is not truly virtuous at all. Edwards suggests that pity, conscience, natural passions and natural love of family are no more than species of prudence, self-seeking and self-love. Edwards thinks more highly of these secondary vi than did some of his followers (Samuel Hopkins, for instance, thought that benevolence must contradict self-love, Edwards only that true benevolence transcended self-love, but his chief purpose in the last major section of The Nature of True Virtue is to deny the status of true virtue to naturally occurring sentiments. Philosophically, Edwards's argument mind. He wants to show that the ethics of Shaftesbury and Hutcheson are just as intellectualist as the intellectualism of Aristotle against which the "new moral philosophers" set their supposedly affectional ethics. Theologically, Edwards wants to defend the particularity of grace; he wishes, in other words, to demonstrate that only the unique, unsurpassing goodness of God can be a legitimate source for true virtue. Together, the Two Dissertations attempted in the 18th century what Philip Watson once described as Martin Luther's main concern in the 16th century -- the promotion of a theological "Copernican revolution" in which anthropocentric instincts are transformed into a theocentric picture of reality. For Edwards, however, it is a "Copernican counterrevolution." Hutcheson, Shaftesbury and Clarke were stressing natural human capacities and the ability of humans to perceive the lawlike regularities of the psyche in a manner analogous to the way their exalted contemporary, Sir Isaac Newton, was demonstrating the lawlike regularities of the physical world. The ethicists were providing justification for the. Edwards, with only a few others of his contemporaries, felt that when ethics was defined (however brilliantly) as a function of innate human possibilities and when nature was defined (however persuasively) as matter in regular motion, the result was to subvert a realistic understanding of the world. The French Catholic Nicholas Malebranche and the Anglican bishop George Berkeley agreed and, in ways appropriate to their theological traditions, attempted similar arguments to show, philosophically and ethically, why all worldviews must collapse into selfishness and chaos unless based on the being and goodness of God. But beyond Edwards, Berkeley and Malebranche, there were not many -- Roman Catholic, state-church Protestant or revivalist evangelical -- who resisted the tide of the times that was putting human nature at the center of things. LITTLE MORE than a century after publication of Two Dissertations, Edwards's message had become almost incomprehensible to many intelligent Americans. In 1880 Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote a long essay on Edwards that lauded his character and logical abilities. But it was another matter. They were "not only false, not only absurd, but... disorganizing forces in the midst of the thinking apparatus." Holmes did not equivocate: Edwards's system seems, in the light of today, to the last degree barbaric, mechanical, materialistic, pessimistic. If he had lived a hundred years later, and breathed the air of freedom, he could not have written with such old-world barbarism .... The truth is that his whole system of beliefs... is gently fading out of enlightened human intelligence, and we are hardly in a condition to realize what a tyranny it once exerted over many of the strongest minds. Twenty years later, Mark Twain was less patronizing but more savage: After he stayed up late one evening to read Edwards's Freedom of the Will he concluded that the author was a "drunken lunatic," a "resplendent intellect gone mad -- a marvelous spectacle... By God I was ashamed to be in such company. humanity could better itself, or Twain, who felt that nothing at all -- and least of all a tyrant-deity -- could help humanity, Edwards was little more than a historical curiosity. The secret of the revival of interest in Edwards that has occurred since the 1930s may well lie precisely where Holmes and Twain found greatest offense. In Perry Miller's provocative judgment with which he began his influential biography of Edwards in 1949, "there come periods, either through disaster or self-knowledge, when applied science and Benjamin Franklin's The Way to Wealth" are not enough. Since most of the 20th century has been such a period, we may be in a position to hear Edwards more clearly than was the progressive generation of Holmes. Whatever the exact reason, interest in Edwards -- and especially his theology -- may be higher now than it has ever been, even in his own day. Edwards's biographer M. X. Lesser has estimated that the number of academic dissertations on Edwards has doubled every decade over the Religious Experience, published by Scribner's in 1988, contains far more references to Edwards than to any other single figure. Not long ago the workshops publishing the papers of Edwards and Benjamin Franklin, both at Yale, held an extraordinarily successful conference on the two 18th-century giants. In January of this year two new academic conferences were announced to consider Edwards's life and work. The splendid Yale edition of Edwards's works has been the most visible fruit of the remarkable revival of interest. JUST AS remarkable has been the revival of interest among what might be considered Edwards's natural heirs, Protestant evangelicals. For a number of reasons, however, the theocentric emphasis of Edwards has played a remarkably small role in the history of evangelical Protestants. To be sure, evangeiicals published, read and reread Edwards's writings on revival and the spiritual life (his edition of missionary David Brainerd's diary, for example, has never been out of print). But they have not shown equal interest in the theology its emphasis on human choice, has dominated much evangelical theology, and it is very different from the theocentric awakenings that Edwards promoted in his subtle analysis of revival. Moreover, the anti-intellectualism nourished by evangelicals could not be further removed from Edwards's patient attention to what we would today call psychology, metaphysics and natural science. But in these latter days even evangelicals are reappropriating the theology of Edwards. Beginning in the 1950s with the Welsh preacher Martin Lloyd-Jones and a British publisher, the Banner of Truth Trust, Edwards's substantial theological works were once again put to use in evangelical circles. More recently, Richard Lovelace of Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary has proposed Edwards as a model for wholistic renewal of the churches, Iain Murray has written a substantial biography stressing the spiritual Edwards with whom academics (despite their fascination with Edwards's mind) are sometimes uncomfortable, and John Piper, a Baptist pastor in the Twin Cities, has written powerful books that lean heavily on Edwards in arguing for a God-centered vision of existence (combination of renewed academic interest and renewed attention to Edwards's theological vision has made it possible to reconsider his "old-world barbarism." Such appreciation is especially appropriate for Two Dissertations, since this work turns out to be surprisingly expansive. Patient perusal of its pages is necessary, for despite the accelerating recognition of Edwards's importance, his prose is still never going to be mistaken for that of Frederick Buechner. But what Edwards's God-ordered picture of the universe offers is a tonic. One who might turn to Edwards, as H. Richard Niebuhr did in a previous generation, for insight concerning the Kingdom of God might remain for the byproducts. The Two Dissertations sketches a world in which it is possible to be reasonably confident about the fruits of empiricism. While our generation can never recover primitive naivete about our epistemological capacities, Edwards suggests that if we begin with confidence in God, we may have reasonable confidence that, when we look at something in nature or in society, we are doing more than looking himself may not have practiced that virtue consistently. As a fine recent book on Edwards's social views by Gerald McDermott points out, Edwards's distaste for the Roman Catholic Church was so strong that he regularly thought he was witnessing its collapse when actually he was merely projecting his own ideological hopes onto the screen of contemporary events (One Holy and Happy Society, Penn State Press). But if Edwards did not practice perfectly what he preached, he still showed that a theocentric conception of the universe implied almost as much for the knowability of the universe as for the knowability of God. Edwards's theocentric vision also turns out to contain a surprisingly high view of humanity. The generation of Oliver Wendell Holmes abandoned Edwards's vision of Cod because it felt he demeaned humanity, but some intellectual successors to Holmes came to the conclusion (as in the later works of Twain) that maybe humanity was not so special either. Edwards, by contrast, believes that humanity is valuable, and that humans may even own glory values and loves human beings. In his phrase, "It is easy to conceive how God should seek the good of the creature, consisting in the creature's knowledge and holiness, and even his happiness, from a supreme regard to himself; as his happiness arises from that which is an image and participation of God's own beauty." Since human "being" is the highest creation of the "Being of all being," God values humanity because he values himself. Humanity turns out for Edwards to be a thing of nearly infinite value, because its purpose is to participate in the glory of the infinitely valuable Being. THE VIRTUES of Edwards's work notwithstanding, even his most respectful readers have sometimes felt overwhelmed by the intense theocentricity of the Two Dissertations and similar works. Two of Edwards's most ardent admirers in the 19th century were Scots who made the sort of indirect criticism that others who delight in Edwards's works may also sometimes feel. Thomas Chalmers was probably quarter century before 1850. He read Edwards with great delight from the time of his youth in the 1790s. As an old man Chalmers reported that after first reading Edwards he had "spent nearly a twelve-month in a sort of mental elysium, and the one idea which ministered to my soul all its rapture was the magnificence of the Godhead, and the universal subordination of all things to the one great purpose for which He evolved and was supporting creation." But Chalmers also added a gentle rebuke, "I should like to be so inspired over again, but with such a view of the Deity as coalesced and was in harmony with the doctrine of the New Testament." At the end of the 19th century, one of Chalmer's successors, James Orr, after praising Edwards highly for his exalted vision of God, paused to note in Edwards "a certain strain... as if he were bent on disciplining himself to live at a height of religious emotion which it does not lie If Chalmers and Orr, as Edwards's friendly critics, were correct that Edwards overreached even himself in the effort to depict the glories of God, their testimony to Edwards's beneficial influence is no less impressive. In all of Edwards's great corpus, the Two Dissertations is perhaps the best place to encounter both the breathtaking vision of divine glory and the human strain required to take in that vision. For most of us, who so rarely strain in that direction while we eagerly seek the contemplation of ourselves, the defects of the Two Dissertations are not nearly as important as the merits, above all of which is the clear-eyed proclamation that we exist for God rather than God for us. Mark Noll recently wrote A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada (Eerdmans). This is the seventh in a series of articles "rethinking religious classics."
IT WAS THE FIRST choir rehearsal of the fall. Since most of us hadn't sung for months, the director began with warm-up exercises ("I Love to Sing") and reminded us about posture and open vowels. He pleaded for regular attendance. He sightread a few pieces and then prepared something familiar for the first week. By this time many of us were yawning and checking our watches. The director asked us to try "one more piece." We sang again. This time we were sitting up straight and smiling. The altos next to me sighed, "Beautiful!" "Wonderful!" The music was John Rutter's "The Lord Bless You and Keep You," and the choir's reaction has been shared by singers and listeners across the U.S. For the past ten years, the music of this contemporary English composer has intrigued and inspired thousands of listeners. Rutter's popularity soared in 1984 when he founded Collegium Records, the company that records and distributes his work. "A Star Rises in Sacred Music! quoted an organist who said, "Rutter is Springsteen!" Although Rutter composes both sacred and secular music, he has been especially claimed and revered by church choirs who are thrilled to have anthems, carols and longer works composed "just for them." Sales reflect Rutter's popularity. Stanley Schmidt of Collegium Records reports a 9 percent sales increase from 1991 to 1992, and with the addition of a new Christmas recording, an increase of 35.2 percent -- 125,000 CDs sold -- from 1992 to 1993. The man who prompts the "oohs" and "ahs" began his musical career as a choirboy at Highgate School in London. The high point of the choir year there was the Festival of Lessons and Carols at Christmas -- and one can still detect the influence of this experience in his compositions. In an interview he spoke of his "immense fondness for a choral tradition that goes back centuries. Many of our collegiate institutions and cathedrals have resident choirs that sing throughout the week. If we the heart of our being." When Rutter first began composing at Clare College in Cambridge he wrote Christmas carols. He showed them to Sir David Willcocks, who was impressed with his work and helped him publish "The Shepherd's Pipe Carol." That started a composing-arranging relationship that continues today (their carols and arrangements are widely used in Christmas concerts). Rutter became director of music at Clare College in 1975, but left to concentrate on composing. He missed working with a choir, however, and in 1981 he established the renowned 28-member Cambridge Singers. The group has recorded over 20 albums and sings in cities around the world. Some of the recordings include Rutter's compositions; others feature works by composers such as Byrd, Faure, Poulenc, Bach and Brahms. Rutter comments that "composing is my deepest passion, my compulsion, but at the same time if I spend a whole month without hearing or making some form of live music I feel deprived in some way." As early performances of his own works. "A composer is possessive of his newly composed pieces and wants to hear them performed right," he admitted. Although Rutter was a boy treble, the Singers include no boys. Rutter achieves the pure tone of the English choir tradition with female voices. "They can bring the emotional experience and sensibility of an adult to bear on the music they're singing," he told Gramophone magazine. Rutter the guest conductor is almost as popular as Rutter the composer. He fills his schedule with appearances at Carnegie Hall, where he conducts works by Puccini, Elgar, Vaughan Williams and others. One 1995 program, "A Salute to America," will include selections from Gershwin's Porgy and Bess as well as American spirituals and folk songs. Other Carnegie Hall programs feature Rutter conducting his own compositions. On May 14 he will conduct his Magnificat, and on May 29 his Requiem, Psalmfest and The Sprig of Thyme. He'll repeat some of these works in Washington. RUTTER IS ALSO popular as a workshop director, and spends time with high school and college choirs as well as with church choir directors. Workshops often conclude with a performance of a Rutter piece-followed by a standing ovation for Rutter. Collegium's Schmidt believes that Rutter is at least partially responsible for a choral renaissance. Public television stations have initiated choral programs, and in response to demand for the music a new publishing company offers ten of Rutter's choral selections; they are selling in 30 countries. Some who can not afford the music learn it anyway. A chorus from Brazil learned the entire 17-minute Gloria without music, then performed it under Rutter's direction at Carnegie Hall. The sales figures and concert schedules suggest that Rutter is indeed something of a star. Musicians appear to have enormous respect for the Cambridge Singers and for Rutter's skill in shaping this group. Barbara Bruns, organ recitalist and assistant director of the Boston Cecelia Society, says that when she wants to hear a piece if the Carnbridge Singers have recorded it. "They're superb." Although many are thrilled with the Singers, some are less enthusiastic about Rutter's music. In fact, his compositions generate rejection as well as raves. Some respond with distaste: "Treacly sweet." "He works with a set of gimmicks, resulting in predictable tedium." "He knows the market and is composing for it." Perhaps the strongest critique has been voiced by David Mason Greene in a review of Te Deum and Other Church Music in the American Record Guide: "What I hear... is Religious Pop -- sweet, vapid formula-tunes, some set to gummily sentimental verses... polite syncopations... and vowels are frequently aspirated over two or three unnecessary notes." Though I recognize the basis of this critique, as a choir member I am thrilled to have a composer write "for us" and bring to the church the excitement of his distinctive talent. Rutter's music is a great gift to churches the boom boxes that keep appearing in our sanctuaries. He also offers music that's accessible to all worshipers -- including those who are not musically trained and whose musical tastes will not be magically elevated by a forced diet of "high-church" music. Rutter occupies a much-appreciated middle ground. I also have to support the revived interest in choral singing that Rutter seems to have fostered. In an interview in the Christian Science Monitor, Rutter mourned people's tendency "to become passive consumers of music instead of makers of music. I think this has produced a kind of spiritual wound in people." If his music generates song and singing, music lovers must celebrate. Music directors who have high aspirations for their choirs may find that Rutter's music attracts new singers. In exchange for the pleasure of singing Rutter, perhaps these singers can be challenged to try Stravinsky and other more complex music. (See the accompanying article by Paul Westermeyer.) But few of us are asking for Stravinsky by name. pastor and musician in Lake Havasu City, Arizona, says it's "wonderful to have Rutter as one of the choices, part of the lineup along with the classics... and the Gaither-style" praise choruses. "He's something to look forward to... He's like a good court composer." Jeff Hunt, music director at Baker Memorial Chapel (United Methodist) in St. Charles, Illinois, has worked both with Rutter's music and with Rutter himself. When local music supporters initiated the St. Charles Art and Music Festival in 1991, Hunt sought a guest conductor who would conduct the Mostly Madrigal Singers, the professional chamber choir that Hunt directs. He thought of Rutter right away. "He wanted to do the Mozart Requiem that first year," Hunt recalls. "It was great. At the first rehearsal, his attitude was "Let's get into the music," and he hit it off well with my singers. He is energetic, exciting and knowledgeable. He can helps the musician, gives him or her a new attitude toward it. He meets the needs of the singer, of the listener, and produces the music well, with sensitivity." More than 1,000 attended the festival. In 1993 Rutter returned to share the stage with Pinchas Zucherman; the 1995 concert will feature Frederica van Stade -- and Rutter. This time he may conduct one of his own compositions. "I perform with few amateur groups now," Rutter said, "but Jeff Hunt's group is an exception -- these musicians have the joy of amateurs and the standards and attitudes of professionals." Hunt finds Rutter's music inspiring. "In 100 years," Hunt predicts, "Rutter will still be considered an important church composer." But which pieces will endure? Spangler says that he appreciates Te Deum, especially "the way Rutter can spin out single melodies and intertwining melodies virtually forever." But he added, "Eventually I get a little tired of it, or Pachelbel, something with a foundation, a more symmetrical structure." Some of Rutter's longer pieces were commissioned for a cathedral or "grand" setting, and I have had to settle for a living-room performance by way of the CD. Perhaps that setting is too confining for Rutter's Gloria or The Falcon. Spiraling trumpets and percussive heraldry build an urgent anticipation into the beginning of these works which makes these opening sections hard acts to follow. And yet they are followed -- by more brass punctuation and more voices building to more climaxes. Rutter's impressionistic dissonance is sometimes appealing, sometimes excessive. Finally, it's too ethereal -- melting away until nothing's left and one doesn't remember much of it. Perhaps it's the accompaniment that's overwhelming: some of the pieces were written for organ or piano, then later arranged with orchestral accompaniment which sounds too lush, too distracting. My favorites are Rutter's shorter pieces. In some of the hymns and carols, the tight boundaries. I pay more attention if I know that the soaring, interwoven voices are not going to drift upward indefinitely. Last Christmas I sang in a concert based on Rutter and Willcocks's 100 Carols for Choirs. The collection includes carols by Britten and Tchaikovsky, new arrangements of familiar carols, and Rutter's own compositions. The audience that came may not have been the same one that would have come to hear a three-hour St. Matthew's Passion or Rachmaninoff's Vespers, but it did fill the sanctuary. We filed in from two sides singing "Let All Mortal Flesh Keep Silence." Once in place we begin a favorite, Rutter's "What Sweeter Music," which uses a text from Robert Herrick. Rutter's setting presents the poem without overwhelming it. We sing of a Nativity miracle. Like an unexpected springtime, this birth "warms" a deep icy northern "December into May." At intermission, a singer suggested that "we should sing this one twice" and I 75, were moved to tears. Perhaps the popularity of Rutter's Christmas music reflects not only his penchant for English cathedral performances but also the fact that his style is well suited to Christmas sentiments. At Christmas we delight in music that winds and climbs and that transports us. Rutter plays well when our emotions are already heightened, perhaps less well when we are mired in late January. Eve Richardson says in The American Organist that Rutter's compositions have "warmth, humanity and, to some extent, vulnerability, which account in part for their popularity. If the occasional critic complains that Rutter's music is "too popular," it may well be because it is almost unfailingly affirmative." Rutter has a gift for joining text and music. He admits that this is his goal. "I do not want to work against a text -- if it contains germs of faith and vision, it is my job to enter into that text, to serve and illuminate that text and bring out hymn lyrics with new vigor, including "Be Thou My Vision" and "God Be in My Head," and he has introduced relatively unfamiliar texts to audiences by welding them to melodies, including excerpts from the Book of Common Prayer (1928), Latin texts from the Ordinary of the Mass and a 16th-century hymn ("Open Thou Mine Eyes"). At another choir rehearsal, the director has stumped us by asking us to choose a favorite anthem for Laity Sunday. I hear myself suggesting Rutter's setting of "For the Beauty of the Earth." It's true that at one point the accompaniment drifts into a comfortable "cha-cha-cha." And there is an octave jump echoing one line that seems silly. But the overall result is a fresh, childlike, festive hymn of praise. I've sung the original tune to this hymn for over 40 years, until singing it has become a reflex action and the hymn of praise a deadly drone. Yet I respect the simple skies, the love that over and around us lies... "Rutter takes these words and revives them with a melody that's immediately appealing. The new melody startles me, and makes me aware of my commitment to the words. The result is an expression of thanks available to both the lethargic long-term choir member and the young or unchurched listener. A new composer attracting new listeners -- this is no small event, especially when the listeners are people who never heard of Herrick, or who are unchurched, or who tired long ago of church music, or who have sung the 1838 melody to "For the Beauty of the Earth" once too often. If these people are hearing and singing Rutter's music, they may also encounter the faith to which the music points. For this, churches must be grateful. IN PREPARING for a concert with a college-community choir, another conductor and I chose two works: John Rutter's Requiem and Igor Stravinsky's Symphony of Psalms. When we began rehearsals first sight. The sounds were immediately accessible and attractive. The choir as a whole responded to the piece with approval, and the singers thanked me for selecting it. Stravinsky's piece, however, was regarded as a very strange and formidable composition. It seemed foreign, and hard to understand. Some people wondered if my colleague and I had made a mistake in choosing it. But as rehearsals progressed, the responses changed. The Rutter piece began to lose some of its appeal, while the Stravinsky became more and more interesting. One of the choir members who had at first wondered if I had lost my mind in choosing Stravinsky later wrote to thank me for introducing her to that piece. This experience suggests not only the difficulty of judging the merits of musical compositions, but that one can distinguish choral music that is immediately appealing from that which is of enduring quality -- and the two categories may not always coincide. One might make another contrast: there is a difference between music which is a text attractive. The music of J. S. Bach, for example, or folk music or chant does not seek to authenticate a text but assumes the text to be true and allows the text to stand for what it is. By contrast, the music used in advertisements seeks to make a text appealing. It assumes that the texts are more or less false and tries to make the deception attractive. Music, in this case, is a selling device. Could we say that Rutter's music fits more in the category of advertising? Is his music the sort that sells something by immediate appeal and that interferes with or obscures the text rather than allowing the text to stand on its own merits? This is not a trivial question. It has to do not only with truth but with how truth is to be expressed. For Christians it gets at the heart of what proclamation is about, whether the end justifies the means, and whether manipulating people with music (or anything else) is? Or is one's choice of music -- for a concert or for worship -- simply a matter of personal preference which admits no discussion? One can make some judgments. For example, it is clear that some music does not wear well. Communities simply drop some music when it loses its appeal. Much of the music that was sung in churches during the 1960s and 1970s is of that sort. Most "popular" music fits the same category, and so does much "classical" music. The church musician's vocation is in part precisely to make musical choices that win serve communities well, that will treat them graciously and respectfully and provide music that is worth their time and effort. With reference to Rutter, therefore, here are some judgments: 1) Rutter chooses good texts. The words of the Psalms, the Requiem, the Gloria, the Sarum Primer and Robert Herrick have a good track record among Christians. If texts are any indication, Rutter's music is not in facile. John Ferguson, professor of organ and church music at St. Olaf College, has commented about how adept Rutter is at imitating others and how well he understands the process of composing. He can spin out and develop a musical idea with great ease and facility. 3) There is an absence of musical muscle in Rutter in the sense that his music does not have a weighty musical argument. Rutter surely can develop musical ideas with persuasive and careful craft, but he tends to set his texts in sweet musical envelopes. He does not use dissonance in an icy or angular 20th-century way. His dissonance is gentle and never really disturbs the calm of the pretty picture. The dissonance at the beginning of his Requiem, instead of feeling like dissonance, has the effect of quiet and dark murkiness that leads to the clarity yet subtle instability of light. Rutter's facility and sweetness can give the impression not only of superficiality but of insularity. It can appear to avoid the hard word of the gospel with realism. It can build a saccharine bubble around us which insulates us from the gospel itself and from the world the gospel addresses and into which we are called. But that is not only Rutter's problem. It is one of the central problems that church music faces in our age. Church music that is all sweet and therefore finally dishonest is the rage because it manages to wall out the problems we face. On the other hand, the gospel does offer comfort and sweetness, and it must be said that Rutter presents the attractiveness of the gospel in a far better and more craftsmanlike way than much of the music around us. In the end I would say that Rutter represents the popular side of romanticism, which tends toward the sweet and superficial -- rather like Norman Rockwell in pictorial art. Rutter and Rockwell leave out the brokenness of life. Hence, they need to be used in conjunction with the steely reality of Picasso and Stravinsky.
Section: Digital Muse
MY OWN TECHNOLOGY STORY begins as a child, with me hearing music in the air and halhucinating scenes in the cracks of the ceiling in my parents' bedroom. I knew that seeing visions in plaster separated me from other kids, and I sure didn't want to tell anybody. So when I saw my father take a blank piece of paper, put it into a virtually colorless liquid, and then pull out this image of me at the zoo, it made me believe that my "floating mind" was going to play an important part in my future. In this way, the very concept of photography changed my life.
Music had the same effect. I remember being about 15 and going down to a dance on Saturday night and hearing the first bars of the Everly Brothers singing "Bye Bye Love:" It stopped me in my tracks. It did for me what I've been trying to do ever since with notes and words.
Along the way, technology influenced me in a number the first. It was the first time I was able to hear anything louder than myself, It was a similar thing when I went into my first real recording session at a BBC studio in London in the early 1960s. It totally changed the way I thought about music, especially because of the ability to layer the sound. I was with the Hollies then, and we did our first two-track recording. Then we began working with a four-track machine. Wow. We could then do double vocals, and it thickened the sound right up. When I was out of the Hollies and joined Crosby and Stills, it was "Wow" again -- now we had eight trades to play with. Today, I have a 12-inch box I take around with me that has 64 tracks, no tape, just straight to a hard drive. I have 29 new songs that are stored on the one-gigabyte drive.
My first computer was an old 512K Macintosh. I started to use it really early scanning software, really primitive black-and-white stuff. I'd scan in an image 1 made and plug it into photo-enhancing software called Digital Darkroom. I'd mess around to get the image I wanted.
My friend, the singer Joni Mitchell, is a painter and she told me about a nice experience she had had with a gallery in Tokyo. I sent them some of my photographs and they said, "Great, send us 50 images blown up to four feet by five feet."
I thought, Holy shit, this was a really daunting task the chemical toxic waste alone from producing these size images was huge. It was about this time that I saw one of the first Iris Graphics ink-jet printers. I decided if we could bend and shape the machine to what we wanted, we could create great art.
I bought the machine in 1988 for $140.000. And after I did my own prints, some friends and I decided that with all of the money invested, we it turned into a business called Nash Editions, a company that has now done work for David Hockhey, Allen Ginsberg, and other artists. This year, in fact, we had our first million-dollar year.
My most ambitious use of technology is my "LifeSighs" show, a live multimedia tour through my life that we have produced six times now. Before that, in 1988, I was offered four speaking engagements at U.S. colleges. At first I didn't know what to do. Give me a guitar and a piano and I can play all day. But an hour of talking?
I mugged up an hour and did my first gig at Kent State. It was an eye-opening experience. I realized that if I could find a way to show the kids what I was talking about while I talked, it could become a very interesting and useful form of entertainment. I decided to create a database of my life, to find every available photograph, video, and as and every place I had visited. It was an enormous task doable only with major computer power. I went to Silicon Graphics and explained what I wanted to do. They sent two million-dollar Onyx machines to my house, each of which had a gigabyte of RAM.
The first show was in the Annenberg Theatre at the University of Pennsylvania. And while I was live onstage, the information went back and forth over high-speed fiber lines to the two Onyx computers in Los Angeles. It crunched the scene I instructed and sent characters and images back to me in real time.
One of the interesting problems we fatal was that electronic signals going 6,000 miles still take time, and 1 had a 10-millisecond delay, Part of the show involves me playing live with David Crosby in Los Angeles in what you have to call "cyberjamming," an absolutely new space. It involves a different kind of intelligance, with incredibly weird spaces and timing. I've slant my life as a musician getting the musical time in a very different way. In that cyberworld everything gets slightly rubbery, and your job is to erase the 10-millisecond delay by anticipating things to come up before they do. It involves an even greater element of trust than playing live.
Actually, doing "LifeSighs" live made me see, first of all, that I wasn't in charge. For me, it's a miraculous thing, and at the first show, I was really proud of the fact that nobody in the history of the planet had done technologically what I did that night.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Graham Nash
By GRAHAM NASH

Graham Nash, musician, first won recognition as a founding member of the Hollies. Nash, 55, achieved superstar status in 1969 when he helped form Crosby, Stills, and Nash.
ESTONIA IS NOT likely to flash immediately to mind when one thinks of Eastern Orthodox homelands. But the little Baltic republic has become the chosen battleground in a canonicaland political-struggle between the two most influential sees in the Orthodox world. On February 23, Patriarch Aleksy II of Moscow formally broke communion with Patriarch Bartholomeos of Constantinople when he refused to include the name of the ecumenical patriarch in the usual commemorations (diptyches) during the Divine Liturgy. That simple omission set into motion a chain reaction of ecclesiastical explosions that threatened a meltdown of world Orthodoxy, which encompasses some 250 million faithful in 15 "autocephalous" or self-governing ancient patriarchates and national churches. But cooler mitered heads prevailed, and the rift proved to be short-lived. In a May 16 press release, the Ecumenical Patriarchate made a stunning announcement: "The Ecumenical and Moscow Patriarchates, in their wish to maintain Orthodox unity and to solve expeditiously the problems which have arisen lately regarding the Orthodox Church of Estonia, have agreed to allow, with extreme dispensation, the Orthodox of Estonia the freedom to choose which of Moscow, they wish to belong to." This was obviously welcome news to everyone who desires harmony among Christians, Orthodox or otherwise. However, that first flush of relief may give way to a sense of foreboding among those who reflect on the terms of the "expeditious" compromise and what it reveals about the political modus operandi of the two patriarchs. Pitted against one another are two very energetic, dynamic, self-confident and forceful bishops. Each one is rather young by Orthodox standards for heads of significant sees (Bartholomeos is 56 and Aleksy 67), and each seems determined to carry the banner of a particular intraOrthodox cause that the other-as well as many Orthodox caught in the middle of this struggle-deems spiritually dangerous or at least an annoying distraction from the church's collective mission. Patriarch Bartholomeos jealously guards the prerogatives of the bishopric of "New Rome" - that is, Constantinople, capital of the ancient Byzantine "East Roman" Empire and second in religious and political dignity only to Old Rome. among equals, "among all the Orthodox bishops throughout the world. (From the Orthodox perspective, the pope of "Old Rome" lapsed into heresy by the 11th century.) Yet some have questioned whether the emphasis rests more on primus than pares. Bartholomeos's formation at the Pontifical Oriental Institute in Rome, from which he received a doctorate in canon law; his ruthless quashing of a nascent pan-Orthodox synod of bishops for North America that was gingerly proposed at an episcopal gathering in Ligonier, Pennsylvania, in December 1994; his imperious and imperial personal style and interventions in Estonia, the Ukrainian diaspora and Japan-all these have earned for Bartholomeos, whether fairly or accurately, the unhappy epithet "neo-papal." PATRIARCH ALEKSY II, at the helm of the largest Orthodox Church, with 100 to 125 million members (minus 35 million if all three of the rival Ukrainian Orthodox communities are factored out), has not yet evoked the late medieval Slavonic myth of Moscow as "Third Rome" supplanting both Rome and historic Russian interests in Estonia, Ukraine, and the rest of the "near abroad" of the former Soviet Union may speak louder than words. He has emerged, by dint of his own will or merely by default, as the de facto defender of what some East Europeans perceive as a distinctive Slavic Orthodoxy, a more traditionalist, nationalist, some would even say reactionary expression of the same Orthodox ethos that, in its current Hellenic and Levantine incarnations, appears a bit more ecumenical and internationalist. Since Moscow and the Russian Church rank only sixth in the primatial order of Orthodox churches, Aleksy can not directly challenge the spiritual authority of his elder brother in Christ in Constantinople. Enter Estonia. The present role within Orthodoxy of the northernmost Baltic republic reminds me of a scene in A Man for All Seasons, the marvelous film about St. Thomas More's valiant but doomed efforts to remain silent on the Act of Succession imposed on the English parliament by King Henry VIII. During More's trial for perjures himself and effectively sends More to the executioner's block. More asks Rich which badge of office he is currently wearing. "Attorney General for Wales," Rich responds. Whereupon More remarks wryly, "What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, but-for Wales?" Substitute Estonia for Wales and the two patriarchs for Rich and one has a better grasp of the debilitating nature of the ecclesial squabble that, at least for a season, rent the venerable Orthodox Church. The tiny Orthodox community in overwhelmingly Lutheran Estonia (45,000 out of a total population of 1.5 million) is merely a crackerjack prize, a trinket in a much greater contest. For the moment it may be the frontline of battle, but in truth it is only a sideshow in a much greater war being waged over the soul of Ukraine and, ultimately, for primacy among the world's Orthodox faithful, as well as for the privilege of leading Orthodoxy in tough ecumenical dialogues that lie ahead-with Rome, the and maybe even the Protestant confessions. NOR SHOULD the secular political dimensions of the conflict be overlooked. Russians are about to vote in their second presidential election. Whether or not Boris Yeltsin wins a second term is not directly relevant to the role of the Moscow Patriarchate in the life of its people. What will matter is whether Yeltsin or Gennady Zyuganov or whoever wins the election charts an aggressive, neoimperialist or neo-Soviet foreign policy that seeks to reassemble the Humpty Dumpty of the old Soviet Union. If darker forces prevail, the symbiosis of church and nation and the strong historic ties between church and state-whether run by czars or commissars-may prove too beguiling for Patriarch Aleksy II to resist. Erstwhile collaborator with the Soviet Communists and born-again spokesman for Russian democracy and nationalism-a potentially volatile, if unfamiliar, mix-he could become emboldened by having stood toe-to-toe with the ecumenical patriarch over Estonia and, once again, attach the coach of the church to the rebuilt engine of the Russian state. That would not bode well for the Ukrainian for the rest of world Orthodoxy-and the rest of the world, for that matter-who, despite the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the liberation of the Russian Orthodox Church from its obsequious devotion to the Soviet agenda at home and abroad, may suddenly be faced with an unwanted deja-vu experience. Conversely, if Patriarch Bartholomeos manages to transform a new foothold in Estonia into yet another sign of his global **29;929;TOOLONG already exercises primary jurisdiction over the Orthodox in Western Europe, North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Oceania and South Korea-there may be no stopping his ascendancy as "more equal" than his equals in the Orthodox episcopacy. He could decide to intervene forcefully in Ukraine, taking all three of the factious Ukrainian Orthodox jurisdictions under his wing in a direct rebuff to Moscow, which continues to maintain a large ecclesial beachhead there under the command of Metropolitan Volodymr of Kiev (or Kyiv in the preferred Ukrainian rendition). Thoroughly reinvigorated, Bartholomeos might attempt to settle longstanding theological differences with Pope John, without consulting the rest of the Orthodox bishops as traditional Orthodox conciliarism would demand. THOUGH APPARENTLY "resolved," the dispute over the Orthodox minority in Estonia has exposed the dark side of contemporary Orthodox intraecclesial politics. The Estonian episode, however, is worth reviewing in detail for the incentive it may yet provide for Orthodox Christians in America (and perhaps in the "old countries" as well) to get their ecclesial act together. A chronicle of key events that neither patriarch would dispute includes the following entries: m Missionaries from Novgorod and Pskov (in present-day Russia) brought Orthodox Christianity to the territory of Estonia in the 12th century when all the lands of medieval Rus' were still under the spiritual care of Constantinople. Local Constantinopolitan councils in 1590 and 1593 officially recognized the new Moscow Patriarchate and included in its canonical territory all the "Trans-Northern Lands," which by 1721 included Estonia as part of the Russian Empire. * Bolshevik Russia, in the throes of a civil war, agreed to granted "autonomy" (but not independence) to the Orthodox Church in the new nation. * In response to an Estonian appeal in 1923 amid the ecclesial uncertainties in the Soviet Union (including Tikhon's arrest and imprisonment), Patriarch Meletios IV of Constantinople created the Autonomous Estonian Apostolic Church as a diocese of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. * In 1944, for the second time during World War II, the Soviet army occupied Estonia and annexed it to the U.S.S.R. * A year later all the Orthodox communities in Estonia, both Russian- and Estonian-speaking, were reconstituted as a diocese of the Moscow Patriarchate. * A "Synod of the Estonian Orthodox Church in Exile" assembled in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1947, under the last pre-Soviet bishop in Estonia, and appealed successfully to Constantinople for spiritual protection. * In 1978 the Ecumenical Patriarchate declared its 1923 action "inoperative" but retained spiritual jurisdiction over the Estonian expatriates. In August 1992, one year after Estonia gained political independence from the U.S.S.R., Patriarch Aleksy Church in 1920 by his predecessor St. Tikhon of Moscow. * A year later, in August 1993, the Estonian State Department of Religions registered the Stockholm synod as sole legal successor to the Autonomous Estonian Apostolic Church with the presumed right of ownership to all church-related immovable property in Estonia. Each citizen was assured freedom of choice between the two rival Orthodox entities, but, since control over its property was now jeopardized, the Russian Orthodox Church filed a lawsuit to defend its legal and canonical standing in Estonia. * Within a year, representatives of 54 of the 83 Orthodox parishes-to be sure, a minority of the Orthodox population, most of whom are ethnic Russians concentrated in the country's large urban congregations-petitioned the Ecumenical Patriarchate for formal acceptance as a diocese. * By late February 1996, it was clear to both Constantinople and Moscow that bilateral negotiations conducted for nearly two years had failed to resolve the Estonian question. The Ecumenical Patriarchate announced on February 20 that it had revived the dormant 1923 decision and resumed appointing Archbishop John of Helsinki, Finland, as its temporary administrator. Three days later, Patriarch Aleksy II announced that the Russian Orthodox Church had severed communion with the Orthodox churches of Constantinople and Finland. * By May 16, after monthlong negotiations, both patriarchates reached a compromise whereby 1) the Ecumenical Patriarchate temporarily suspended its February 20, 1996, decision for four months; 2) each Orthodox parish is free to align with either Constantinople or Moscow during the interim; and 3) the Moscow Patriarchate restored full communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate. In light of the intensity of the disagreement between the two parties, these items alone form an amazing set of undisputed facts. But each side brought to this mutual historical understanding its own peculiar concerns, interpretations and political agendas. And the exchange of views was hardly uplifting or fraternal. Patriarch Aleksy II and his Holy Synod in Moscow viewed themselves throughout the conflict as the aggrieved party in a power grab by the new Estonian government, on one hand, and, between the pincers of church and state forces hostile to ethnic Russians. In its February 23, 1996, press release, for example, the Moscow Patriarchate accused the Estonian government of supporting a "schismatic group of priests and believers" in a cynical attempt to "to force the Russian-speaking faithful out of the country" and "to weaken and divide Orthodoxy." Aleksy et al. also decried Constantinople's "one-sided move" in accordance with the Estonian authorities as "a gross violation of all basic canonical rules existing in the Orthodox world by invasion into the territory of another local Orthodox Church." The crux of the Muscovite argument was really quite simple: Estonia has from time immemorial been a part of the Russian Orthodox orbit, and a majority of the Orthodox faithful in the Baltic republic are and always have been of Russian ancestry. The confusion wrought by the October Revolution did not change these essential historical and ethnic connections. The Estonian Church's autonomy under the jurisdiction of Constantinople beginning in 1923 of the Russian Orthodox Church and the Soviet regime's disruption of the usual channels of communication between church hierarchies in Moscow, Tallinn (Estonia's capital) and Constantinople. When Estonia was reincorporated into the Soviet Union and the Orthodox Church in Estonia was likewise restored to the jurisdiction of Moscow, this "reunification was welcomed by all the parishes of the Estonian Orthodox Church." The Ecumenical Patriarchate's 1978 declaration that rendered its 1923 decision "inoperative" and formally recognized the jurisdiction of Moscow in Estonia proper is still binding upon Constantinople and ought not to have been abrogated unilaterally. Such was Moscow's reading of the situation. THE ECUMENICAL Patriarchate endeavored, for the most part, to play down the controversy, but it, too, resorted to hyperbole and acrimonious accusations. Insisting that nothing in the whole affair warranted a break in communion that would prove enervating for world Orthodoxy, Patriarch Bartholomeos and his Holy Synod refused to reciprocate Moscow's excommunication. But Bartholomeos et al. defended their "reactivation" of the Estonian Orthodox Church in a Patriarchal and Synodical Act issued on February 20, 1996. Since, the act declared, canons 9 and 17 of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (which met in Chalcedon in A.D. 451) accorded to the see in the imperial capital of Constantinople the role of mediator in ecclesiastical disputes within or between other dioceses, the "Most Holy Mother Church of Constantinople" had no choice but to respond as a tender mother to the "free and unanimous request" of one of her daughter peoples in East Europe in July 1923 to be received under her spiritual supervision. The autonomous Church of Estonia, however, was "violently destroyed" in 1944 and "made subject to the Church of Russia" for political reasons. But the Ecumenical Patriarchate refused to accept this fait accompli and always regarded the Estonian Orthodox Church in exile as the canonical successor to the oppressed church in the homeland. The Ecumenical Patriarchate's 1978 decision was merely a temporary, fraternal concession to the Church of Russia then, in any case, be enforced in Estonia as long as it was part of the Soviet Union. But the liberation of Estonia in 1991 had so changed the political and national landscape that it was time for the Orthodox Church in Estonia to be restored through "reactivation" of the 1923 decision. A Russian-speaking bishop administering "an integral unit" within the Estonian Orthodox Church would ensure the "unhindered" continuity of the distinctive dimensions of the Russian Orthodox experience. Such was Constantinople's rationale. Bartholomeos's case against the Moscow Patriarchate's role in Estonia was, like Aleksy's against him, chock full of ad hominem attacks and charges of political machinations. In a vituperative letter to Aleksy dated February 24, 1996, the ecumenical patriarch accused his "dear brother in Christ God and concelebrant" of "using the negotiations as a pretext to secure an indefinite extension thus greatly damaging the sacred cause of Orthodoxy in Estonia." The pro-Moscow faction of the Estonian Orthodox community currently headed by Archbishop Kornily was a Stalinist-imposed church structure that exploited the expulsion of Orthodox Estonians from their own homeland. The so-called autonomous Estonian Orthodox Church tied to Moscow was really a sham. "How can a church be called Estonian," Bartholomeos asked, "when it is made up of Russian immigrants?" Further, Estonia was, for Bartholomeos, only the latest in a series of trespasses by the Moscow Patriarchate "in countries under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, namely, Estonia, Hungary, and elsewhere, always by the power of the Soviet Army." Turning very personal, Bartholomeos reminded Aleksy-who earlier in his career had served as Moscow's bishop in Tallinn for almost 30 years-that the Russian patriarch had been "born in Estonia under the omorphorion bishop's stole of the Church of Constantinople and as her child you were baptized and spent your childhood there." THESE WERE obviously uncharitable words for brothers in Christ to hurl at one another. As if that were not enough to dampen the spirits of Orthodox joined-generally for the worse-by most of the autocephalous Orthodox churches and by many other prominent Orthodox leaders. Weighing in clearly on the side of Moscow were the patriarchs or senior metropolitans of the Orthodox churches of Antioch, Jerusalem, Serbia, Bulgaria and Poland. Metropolitan Dorotheus of Prague (Czech Republic) wrote to Patriarch Bartholomeos, suggesting, diplomatically to be sure, that the actions of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Estonia might further delay the Great and Forthcoming Council of all the Orthodox churches, for which Orthodox have been preparing for a generation. Steering a more neutral course, the leaders of the Orthodox churches of Alexandria (Egypt), Georgia (in the Caucasus) and Cyprus expressed the hope that fraternal dialogue would settle the conflict as soon as possible. Metropolitan Theodosius and the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church in America, notwithstanding their filial ties to the Moscow Patriarchate, also refrained from taking sides in the dispute (although Bishop Tikhon of San Francisco issued a sharp denunciation of Constantinople in one of his many online the heads of three undisputed autocephalous churches: Archbishop Anastasios of Tirana, Albania; Archbishop Seraphim of Athens, Greece; and Patriarch Teoctist of Bucharest, Romaniawho is still engaged in his own fouryear dispute with Patriarch Aleksy II over the Orthodox Church in the post-Soviet Republic of Moldova. Patriarch Bartholomeos and the Constantinopolitan position enjoyed unqualified public support only from a few Orthodox leaders who are controversial in their own right. "Patriarch" Filaret (Denysenko), disputed head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyivan Patriarchate (one of three rival claimants to episcopal primacy in Ukraine and former metropolitan of Kyiv under the Moscow Patriarchate) denounced Moscow's refusal to commemorate the name of Bartholomeos as "an act of ecclesiastical schism." Father Gleb Yakunin, the longtime human rights activist and critic of the Moscow Patriarchate's collaboration with the Soviet Communists who was "defrocked" by Patriarch Aleksy II in 1993, ostensibly for running for re-election to a seat in the Russian parliament, pronounced Patriarch Bartholomeos "100 percent right" on the Estonian question to the dissident Orthodox parishes in Ukraine and Russia. One bishop who distinguished himself in the whole nasty affair is Metropolitan Antony of Sourouzh, the Moscow Patriarchate's own exarch in London, England. On the eve of Pascha ("Easter") he appealed to his own patriarch to restore communion between the Russian Church and the Ecumenical Patriarchate. Although he accepts Moscow's argument that Bartholomeos's interventions in Estonia and in the Ukrainian community outside Ukraine are offensive to his fellow Russians, Antony observed that the break in communion, while hardly touching the faithful in Russia, has devastated the Orthodox in England, particularly the parish in Oxford, where Greek and Russian communities share a common buildin$. DOES THE May 16 compromise show the way out of this ecclesial quagmire? Despite the widespread acclaim that the announcement has drawn thus far, the deal-for that is truly what this agreement is-strikes me as an abdication of spiritual leadership by both patriarchs and a most unhappy precedent for world Orthodoxy. Both patriarchs have behaved more like Solomon in the classic Old Testament story. By settling, almost cynically, for half of the Estonian daughter church, Bartholomeos and Aleksy may have killed her Estonian Orthodox identity in its infancy, or at least plunged this nascent church into a fratricidal conflict that will be played out in congregation after congregation. In a Keston News Service story released just prior to the May 16 announcement, Lawrence A. Uzzell reported that clergy and laity already were maneuvering-sometimes quite dishonorably-for support of their preferred patriarchate, with mistrust on the rise among the Orthodox throughout the country. One may expect this situation to worsen in the next four months as each congregation plays the dangerous game of patriarchate by plebiscite. The compromise "solution" also imports the failed American model of Orthodox jurisdictional confusion. Since the 1920s in the aftermath of the October Revolution in Russia, Orthodoxy in America has become a crazy quilt of competing ethnic New World colonies with generally short tethers to the mother churches in the Old World. With as many as five bishops in Orthodox have made a mockery of the ancient canonical principles of one bishop per city and integral territorial dioceses. Now, as the Orthodox in America struggle to find a way out of this ecclesial morass, the patriarchs of Constantinople and Moscow have seen fit to visit this confusion upon little Estonia. Not that either patriarch is enamored of the American experience. They are, on the contrary, merely perpetuating the Roman idea: better to divide the empire, as Diocletian did in A.D. 286, than to risk losing everything in a struggle for undoubted supremacy. IF THE LONG-TERM effects of the Estonian episode appear still more grievous than the temporary schism itself, it is still possible for world Orthodoxy to emerge from the whole affair stronger rather than weaker, and better equipped to witness to a spiritually troubled world on behalf of the ancient, unchanging, life-giving salvation in Christ Jesus that the Orthodox Church alone purports to provide in all its fullness. I suspect that St. Augustine of Hippo's felicitous phrase "O felix culpa's fault, grace abounds all the more. The Estonian episode may, ironically, serve as a platform for one or more exciting changes in ecclesial business-as-usual. First, a new model of Orthodox conciliarism may emerge. In a bitter editorial in the April issue of his diocesan magazine, Metropolitan Philip of the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of New York and North America concluded that the Estonian crisis proves that "our system does not work." How, he asked, can the ecumenical patriarch mediate disputes among autocephalous Orthodox churches when he himself is a party to such a dispute? Further, without a Byzantine emperor to preside over ecumenical councils the Orthodox no longer have a referee beyond the sacerdotium. Metropolitan Philip did, however, propose a positive solution. "Is it impossible," he asked rhetorically, "to form a Pan-Orthodox Commission, representing all autocephalous churches, to mediate inter-Orthodox disputes?" This sounds like a no-brainer, but until the Estonian episode no bishop, to my knowledge, had made such transcend the Roman idea altogether. Old Rome, New Rome, Third Rome: does the church in the modern world, with its third millennium looming only a few years away, really have to cling to any of these evocations of a bygone era and a dusty imperial image? What keeps the Ecumenical Patriarchate hanging on for dear life in the Phanar ghetto of Istanbul (still Constantinople to the Orthodox)? To do so, despite five long centuries of oppression by Turkish governments, manifests a profound, albeit increasingly desperate, loyalty to its once glorious Byzantine past. Shorn of its fragile tether to New Rome, especially if the Turks decide at last to flout world opinion and evict the Patriarchate from its borders, the Ecumenical Patriarchate fears for its standing as primus inter pares. The legendary claim to apostolicity through St. Andrew the Apostle notwithstanding, the Ecumenical Patriarchate derived its title from the seat of empire: Constantinople was the political and cultural capital of the oikoumene-the "inhabited world," or, at least no longer qualifies for this exalted title. SOME ORTHODOX visionaries have. suggested that the Ecumenical Patriarchate might relocate to Athens or to Geneva, headquarters of the World Council of Churches, but I would propose what is perhaps a more ingenious and less politically unappetizing alternative. Why not consider New York City, cultural crossroads of the late 20th century and headquarters of the United Nations? If Patriarch Bartholomeos moved his see to Manhattan and became "Archbishop of New York, Metropolitan of the Americas, and Ecumenical Patriarch," he would solve three vexing problems at once: 1) he would immediately unite all the disparate Orthodox jurisdictions in North America into one 5-million-member church, the seventh-largest ecclesial organization in the U. S. and a formidable contender on the ecumenical scene; 2) he would effectively set Western limits to the claims of the patriarch of the West (that is, the pope of Rome), insofar as all of the Western Hemisphere would fall under the spiritual care of the second see in Christendom (instead) he would be free-without losing face-to relinquish spiritual care and supervision over Finland, Western Europe and, yes, Estonia. Bartholomeos would ultimately "lose" the battle over the Baltic republic, but he would "win" the war of the patriarchs for de facto primacy in world Orthodoxy. Finally, the unenlightening competition between two Old World patriarchs may convince the 5 million Orthodox Christians in the New World to cut the umbilical cords to their mother churches and to come of age; to take their place collectively as a vibrant, hopeful daughter church alongside their haggard, downbeat mothers; to become an energetic, evangelistic, genuinely prophetic counterpoint to the politics of convention, the ethnic parochialism and personal oneupmanship that appear inescapable in the venerable patriarchates in Europe. This language may sound typically American, the land of hubris one might expect from a convert to Orthodoxy. But my own hierarch, Bishop Nathaniel of the Romanian Orthodox Episcopate of the Orthodox Church in America, mused in print last September about what might have, Pennsylvania, in December 1994 had proclaimed "a land of ecclesiastic Boston (Ligonier) Tea Party by cutting all canonical ties to the mother churches and forming a new "American Church." There would have been a temporary estrangement, but" in time, the de facto "would become de lege." But the bishops did not get radical, and the enthusiasm so evident in Ligonier seems in the last year and a half to have waned considerably. Until, that is, the Estonian episode reminded those of us in North America that all roads need not lead ultimately to Rome-Old, New or Third. Author Affiliation Alexander F. C. Webster is pastor of the Protection of the Holy Mother of God Orthodox Church in Falls Church, Virginia, and author of The Price of Prophecy: Orthodox Churches on Peace, Freedom, and Security (Eerdmans). //
Faced with time limits on cash assistance, welfare recipients have to develop an employment strategy. // BY OCTOBER 1, 359 individuals currently on welfare in Charlottesville, Virginia, had to secure 30hour-a-week jobs in order to continue receiving the full level of public assistance. One of these individuals is 22-year-old Shamika (her name and that of others in this article have been changed). She is an African-American single mom with a two-year-old son and a four-year-old daughter. Shamika lives in Blue Ridge Commons, a low-income housing community of a few hundred families. Blue Ridge Commons is also the site of the Abundant Life Family Center. a church-sponsored outreach program for children and adults, which includes a life and job skills training initiative we call JobKEYS. Shamika is one of six participants in our inaugural JobKEYS class. Our experience in working with her -- Lad many of her neighbors-hasintimately acquainted us with the complexities behind the ubiquitous "welfare to work" slogan. Our congregation is firmly convinced that our work in Blue Ridge Commons is a necessary response to the Bible's call. We are less certain all) out how to love our needy neighbors effectively, but we are learning. Perhaps our church's story-in-progress may encourage other congregations as they consider how to adapt their community outreach efforts in response to welfare reform. Most of the 1,200 white. middle-class congregants at Trinity Presbyterian (Church (P(CA) were unfamiliar with the Blue Ridge (Commons neighborhood until 1995, when it began to develop its urban ministry. A few remembered that a two-vcr (l-old girl was killed there in a 1994 shootout between rival drug lords, but her death was only another grim crime statistic. A homicide in Blue Ridge Commons over Thanksgiving 1996 produced a dramatically different reaction. Amy Denise Carter, the mother of Michael, a first-grade he s! in our tutoring program at the Abundant Life Center, was gunned down in her upstairs bathroom by an estranged boyfriend while Michael and his younger siblings sat el ing in the livingroom downstairs. When (mIr pastor announced the murder from the pulpit, many in prepared ser ion, and we spent the morning in prayer and intercession. Suddenly this was our tragedy. We were experiencing the painful privilege of what Church Father Gregory of Nyssa defined as true mercy: "the voluntary sorrow that joins itself to the sufferings of another." Our participation in this suffering has been confusing and often overwhelming. Dean, a medical student at the University of Virginia, was tutoring a fifth grader, and was moved when the boy cried over the imprisonment of his older brother and then told Dean that after God, his brother and his parents, Dean was the most important person in his life. Seventy-three-year-old Miriam called me up after she'd made Mother's Day cards with third graders during a tutoring session. She reported that one girl had written, "Dear Mommy, I love you. Please, please don't leave me." The fear is not unrealistic. A six-year-old girl in our summer camp program went home one day and found her mother gone; the to foster care. Volunteers working with the adult participants in the JobKEYS program have also had their eyes opened. One participant told us that she'd been called "nigger" on the job. Another, pregnant with her first child, admitted that her boyfriend had been beating her up and had even waved a sawed-off shotgun in her face. In some of our previous attempts to serve poor families, our church's benevolence was at arms length; we addressed material needs but seldom developed face-to-face relationships. Through our efforts in Blue Ridge Commons, we've progressed falteringly toward a richer mercy. In the words of 19th-century London poverty fighter Octavia Hill, we've become willing not only to help the poor, but to know them. IF THE CHURCH is to respond effectively to the new challenges faced by families on welfare, it must initiate targeted, holistic, relationally based programs that help the poor move toward a permanent transformation. Government officials increasingly look to the churches for help because they know that poor from welfare to work. In Jackson, Mississippi; San Diego, California; Charlotte, North Carolina; Annapolis, Maryland; and other cities across the nation, local departments of social service are creating partnerships with congregations. Welfare families are mentored by small teams of church volunteers for six to 12 months. The difference in the amount of time granted to these families by churches as compared with that given by overburdened caseworkers is staggering. According to our local department of social services, for example, case workers spend an average of 39 hours per client over a six-month time period. By contrast, a welfare-to-work program in Annapolis that matches congregations with welfare families reports that their volunteers spend an average of 400 hours with the families during the six months they work together. In Charlottesville we are imitating several aspects of the Annapolis initiative. Each of our Job KEYS participants is linked with a Friendship Circle of three to six individuals who help the participant write a resume, complete job applications, practice for job interviews More important, however, is the personal, caring support that these church volunteers offer. Shamika told one woman in her Friendship Circle that without their support she'd never be making it through the JobKEYS program. The intensive, individualized support we're trying to offer is fundamental for women like Shamika, who face a new and daunting challenge under welfare reform: strategic planning. The time limits imposed on cash assistance (two years at any one stretch and a lifetime limit of five years of aid) mean that recipients will have to decide two things: when they most need extra financial help, and how long they should stay on the welfare rolls at any particular time. Virginia's welfare reforms will work to the advantage of savvy recipients who thoroughly acquaint themselves with the new rules and then use assistance wisely over the short term in ways that will position them for long-term financial stability. Recipients who fail to make a series of necessary adjustments in light of the reforms will be left high and dry. with welfare recipients as they navigate the new realities, and must provide transitional services. Under the old system, most welfare recipients were penalized when they entered the work force. Money earned through new jobs reduced the amount of their AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent Children) checks, so no one had an economic incentive to work. Under the old system, recipients also faced what has been called the "cliff effect." That is, they could not make a gradual transition from welfare to work because as soon as they accepted employment, their food stamp and housing benefits were dramatically reduced or eliminated. (One program participant in Annapolis who secured a new job saw her rent in public housing skyrocket overnight from $25 per month to over $400.) In some instances, recipients lost Medicaid benefits as well. The government's old approach seemed to equate employment with economic self-sufficiency. But that assumption is erroneous. Most welfare recipients secure minimum-wage jobs without benefits. With the added expenses of day care "without continued assistance (for example, health insurance and food stamps)." As one church volunteer in the Annapolis program pointed out, welfare recipients usually lack the kinds of practical support middleclass parents provide their adult children as they make the transition into their first "real" job-used furniture for the new apartment, free rides to work, groceries, a small loan. Put simply, most welfare recipients need a couple of years to achieve complete independence from public aid. Virginia's reforms address the deficiencies of the old system. The reforms are in some ways strict, in some ways generous: strict, because the able-bodied must go to work within 90 days; generous, because working recipients get to keep both their paychecks and their welfare checks and are eligible, after their two years of cash assistance, for a third year of "transitional" benefits (Medicaid, food stamps, day care vouchers, housing subsidies). Thus, recipients have a cushion of two to three years of government support force. Through our JobKEYS program, we help participants design a workable strategy for this challenge. They enhance their marketability by learning computer keyboarding and word-processing skills. Our 12-session life skills curriculum teaches them how to communicate in the office, handle conflict, manage time, relate to authority, and set short- and long-term goals. A job counselor meets individually with participants to help them inventory their strengths, skills and interests. THE MOST important aspect of the program, though, is the personal support provided by the Friendship Circles. These caring mentors help participants outline the long series of steps they must take to position themselves for life after welfare. Identifying and sequencing these steps is no easy task; it requires a forward-looking, strategic mind-set and a pattern of thinking, planning and deciding that is often foreign. Actually taking the steps is even harder, since that requires an invigorated self-discipline and, in some instances, significant changes in lifestyle and attitude. The sober reality is that making the transition from welfare to She is quick to admit that she has made many mistakes, but is now determined to make something better for herself and her family. The obstacles she faces are considerable: she lacks a high school diploma and is the sole care-giver for her two kids. Her work history is littered with short-lived jobs and dismissals. Although her eager attitude and enthusiasm are definite strengths, they can work to her disadvantage if not channeled appropriately. A few months into our program, Shamika accepted two part-time positions through a local temping firm. She worked several hours in the morning for a catering service and then a few hours in the evening for UPS. While we affirmed her positive attitude toward work, we found ourselves cringing at the way her schedule wrecked havoc on her home life and stole time away from pursuits that would give greater long-term payoff. For example, when an accountant from church offered JobKEYS participants oneon-one budget counseling, Shamika, who has never lived on a budget and needs to learn how, was too artificiality in the economic life of welfare recipients. They do not have to pay full market rent, and they buy their groceries with food stamps. Recipients sometimes overlook these technically "noncash" benefits; there's a sense that such perks have always been there and always will be. But with term limits they won't always be there, and recipients need to start living in a way that takes these future realities into account. Under the new rules, some are keeping both their employment and welfare income. These people are enjoying a greater cash flow than ever. But after three years they will not receive any help from the state, so recipients must use their surplus income to create a cushion for the future. They must learn now how to live on the income that they will likely be making three years down the road, when all public assistance stops. Recipients like Shamika must also think strategically about their employment. Accepting any job now, just to have a job, is unwise. that will offer me opportunities for advancement, so that in three years, when I do not have the cushion of public aid, I will be able to earn a salary sufficient to meet my expenses? Shamika's decisions about which firm to work with and what kind of position to accept are vitally important. Her spotty work history indicates she has had trouble retaining jobs beyond six months. If she spends the next three years hopping from one job to another, that sullied work history will kill her chances of finding a stable, decent-paying job later. She needs to take a job that she can retain for two to three years to position herself for the future. As the October 1 deadline loomed, we encouraged some people to accept 30-hour-week jobs and use the remaining ten hours of the work week to plan for their independence from welfare. Our ministry aims to help them sharpen their office skills, design a personal budget, find affordable day care, determine what kind of work they think they can for advancement, and work on areas of personal weakness (managing their time better, presenting themselves well to potential employers, or carefully following directions). The message of welfare reform is not solely "Get a job!" It is also, "Prepare yourself for independence from the dole, for aid will not continue forever." ANY WELFARE recipients are completely unfamiliar with this nd of strategic planning. We are continually struck by the "presenttime" focus of some Blue Ridge families. My friends at Love, Inc., a local Christian charity, are familiar with the pattern: people call when it is too late to give them much help. Individuals receive notices from the utility company, warning them that their electricity will be cut off if they do not make a payment, yet they wait until the cut-off day to ask for help. Love, Inc., workers have repeatedly counseled people to call when they receive their first cut-off warning. In five years, only a handful of people have. Some people are simply overwhelmed with their financial problems and see no way to fix them. They mark time in the hopes that somehow, by some miracle, the problems will just go away. (I know one family that simply threw away their bills when they did not have the money to pay them.) Some present-dayfocused adults grew up in families where this orientation was the norm: no one ever modeled an approach to life that considers tomorrow and next month as well as today. Others believe that there is no hope for the future, so why worry about it? Still others believe that they are unable to do anything to influence their own future-the future is beyond their control and life is something that happens to you, rather than something you make happen. The old welfare system never challenged this present-day approach to life: aid was something you were entitled to for as long as you met the eligibility requirements. There was no economic need to plan for the future. Welfare reform has succeed under the reforms, many recipients will need to adopt a whole new approach to life. For its part, the church needs to adopt a new approach to benevolence. In addition to shifting to an outreach that emphasizes personal relationships over food and money, congregations should reconsider the scope of their outreach services. At Trinity we have chosen to invest our financial and volunteer resources in one neighborhood despite the fact that there are needy families throughout the city. The "neighborhood adoption" model is certainly not the only legitimate approach, but fairly large, well-off churches may find it a good fit. In our case, the Abundant Life Family Center has become a catalyst for reknitting the neighborhood by providing supportive small groups. The JobKEYS class is a community within a community in which students encourage and challenge one another. Since they all live within walking distance of one another, their relationships can grow outside of class. A sense of "being in this together" is nurtured in part by the intensity of meet twice a week for three hours and may work a third night in the computer lab). The accessibility of the center makes it easier for the participants to manage an intense program-commuting three times each week to a distant location might be too much. Because the program is visible in the neighborhood, participants enjoy the satisfaction of knowing that others are aware of their initiative. While a few Blue Ridge Commons residents sneer at the JobKEYS participants, others affirm and encourage them. When two of the community grandmothers, Mrs. Knight and Mrs. Rogers, spot the participants coming and going at the Family Center, they shout out words of encouragement. Mrs. Knight comes down to the computer lab to tell the young women how proud she is of them. She has offered to babysit Shamika's children while Shamika goes out on job interviews. WE ARE LEARNING that an effective job training program addresses a far broader range of issues than one might initially expect. In a few instances, all that a welfare recipient needs such as transportation. Most of the time, however, a program that only attempts to build skills and solve logistical problems is insufficient. When we surveyed local employers prior to the beginning of the Job KEYS program, they told us over and over again that given the choice between hiring a technically skilled but undependable applicant and a not-so-skilled but reliable, courteous applicant, they'd take the latter individual every time. Though the employers appreciate the computer skills training, they are far more excited that we are providing personal and emotional support to the participants and discussing the essential character traits of a good, faithful employee. We have heard numerous stories of single mothers who lost their jobs because they missed work when their children were sick or in trouble, or because they were unable to keep personal problems from hindering their job performance. Our physical presence in the Blue Ridge Commons neighborhood means that we are available to help JobKEYS participants deal with these sorts of issues. We comfort a mother whose teenage son is picked out of an abusive relationship, or provide respite for a woman who needs a break from caring for a disabled child. This counseling may not appear to have anything to do with job training, but since individuals are more than employees, these kinds of supports dramatically enhance their ability to manage job responsibilities. Finally, being based in the neighborhood helps us develop strong relationships between JobKEYS participants and Friendship Circle members. The Family Center provides a safe, convenient and familiar meeting place that helps put the participants at ease. Since some lack transportation, it is a huge help that they can simply walk to our building to meet with their circles or work on their resumes in our computer lab. Since some participants lack telephones, our on-site staff can communicate between the circles and their participants. The importance of these simple, practical benefits should not be underestimated. Participants and their encouragers must meet regularly, face-to-face. When contact is more limited, relationships fail to develop and the participants fail to get off welfare. One of the participants is still on welfare. Two weeks into the program she discovered she was pregnant with her first child; she probably won't be working any time soon. But she decided to keep, rather than abort, the baby; she's kicked out her abusive boyfriend; she's eager for parenting advice. She trusts us and is receptive to our counsel. Two other participants have been in the same jobs for over ten years and say they have been stimulated to take the initiative and apply for jobs on the next rung up. And the computer skills they've learned give them a realistic chance of securing those jobs. Shamika has dropped one of her part-time positions and is pursuing the possibility of full-time employment with UPS. She still shows up regularly at the Family Center to practice her typing or get some advice and encouragement. We're not starting any revolutions. We're simply following the approach espoused by author Glenn Loury: we're trying to change the neighborhood" one Affiliation Amy L. Sherman is director of urban ministry at Trinity Presbyterian Church in Charlottesville, Virginia. She is the author of Restorers of Hope: Reaching the Poor in Your Community with Church-Based Ministries That Work (Crossway Books). //
Section: 85 Years &; Ideas FLOPS Many innovations flopped before they could get to market. Some ideas should never have been tried. But the inventive spirit refuses to give up
With the spectacular collapse of so many dot-coms over the last couple of years, it's easy to forget that the history of American invention is a huge collection of failed ideas, some brilliant and unlucky, many febrile and plain idiotic. Passenger space travel may happen some day. Towing icebergs to drought-stricken areas probably won't. Aspirations, along with bad ideas, never die. Trial -- and lots of error -- is embedded in entrepreneurship. The impulse to change the world for the better can as easily result in a breakthrough as a humiliating, and expensive, defeat. Flying Cars
The dream of every commuter trapped in traffic, the "Flying Flivver" was Ford Motor Co.' s prototype single-seat plane, introduced in 1926. A stubby craft with wings that resemble dachshund ears, it never went into production, coming to an abrupt end after Harry Brooks, off the Miami coast.
That didn't end the dream. Aviation enthusiast and Bureau of Air Commerce chief Eugene Vidal (father of novelist Gore Vidal) offered government grants to manufacturers of a "poor man's airplane" -- one that could be had for $700 back in the 1930s. Inventor Waldo Waterman took him up on the offer in 1936 and built a small plane with removable wings, a clutch and a transmission, called the Waterman Arrowbile. It actually flew through the air and rumbled over roads, but didn't fly as well as the average plane nor drive as well as the average car. Waterman never mass-produced the thing and no one has since found a market for an aerial roadster.
And yet. Two months ago, at the Texas State Fair, inventor Paul Moller displayed his Skycar, a vertical takeoff-and-landing craft with a cockpit seating four and four nacelles that house eight rotary engines. "The automobile," he says, "is only an interim step on our
Forty years before fax machines became ubiquitous, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch sent out 15 copies of its nine-page-long "radio edition" to a test group. A printer hooked up to an RCA radio transcribed articles onto a rolled sheet of paper. During the 1940s the New York Times, the Sacramento Bee, the Chicago Tribune and the Miami Herald all faxed abridged daily editions of their paper to radio listeners. Why bother? You could get the latest news without being tied to the living room and your Philco.
Advertisers never went for it, so newspapers had to eat the costs of receivers (the Bee spent $75,000 in ten months of fax publishing in 1939). During World War II the government took control of most of the radio spectrum used for fax papers and killed momentum for the idea -- except for the Miami Herald, which dropped $24,000 in 1948. Videophones
In 1931 AT &T; set up a two-way visual conversation between its headquarters and Bell Labs, about a mile apart in Manhattan while a separate TV feed brought video from one 2-inch-wide screen to the other.
Ma Bell showed up at the New York World's Fair in 1964 with the Videophone as the centerpiece of its pavilion. A hit with fairgoers, it needed work (the video display was wider than it was tall). Four years later AT &T; began field trials in Chicago and Pittsburgh, signing up 300 users who paid $160 a month for equipment rental and 30 minutes of talking time. The project was shelved in 1974, after AT &T; gave up trying to figure out how to sell a service that's worthless to callers unless their friends and families buy it, too.
Internet conferencing -- at a fraction of the cost of AT &T's; system -- might be its final incarnation. 3-D Movies
A 1953 Warner Bros. horror film called House of Wax typifies the 3-D genre: Vincent Price rebuilds his wax museum after a fire by covering human bodies in wax. Blind in one eye, director Andr de If history is a judge, he didn't miss anything. There were 27 3-D films released in 1953, mostly horror or sci-fi. Since 1960 only 54 3-D films have been foisted on moviegoers.
The technology behind sending limbs, actors and sharks lunging out of the movie screen wasn't even that new. The technique made its premiere in three short films at Manhattan's Astor Place Theater in 1915.
As the 3-D fad waned in 1960, producer Michael Todd Jr. tried to take the moviegoer into the fourth dimension. Not time. Smell. His film, Scent of a Mystery (with Peter Lorre as a dirty old man named Smiley), was the premiere and finale of Smell-O-Vision, in which odors were pumped into the theater from the projection room at pre-established cues. Director John Waters sent up the concept by having scratch-and-sniff cards passed out with tickets at his 1981 film, Polyester. Nuclear Bombs as Steam Shovels
It sounds improbably stupid, but in 1957 the Atomic Energy the peaceful uses for nuclear explosives. "Before ending the program in 1977, Uncle Sam had spent $700 million.
In 1958 Edward Teller, a creator of the hydrogen bomb, suggested using nuclear explosions to dig a harbor near Cape Thompson, Alaska. On a tour of the region, where he stumped for "Project Chariot," Teller told residents that the explosions would be so precise that they could dig the harbor into the shape of a polar bear.
Panama also found itself on the Plowshare target list. The 50-year-old Panama Canal had proven too small for the supertankers of the day. The U.S. wanted to build a new waterway though Panama's Darin province; nothing short of a nuclear blast could cut through the flooded rain forests and 1,000-foot-high mountains.
A voluntary nuclear test ban between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in 1958 kept the Alaska and Panama projects from entering the testing phase. When the Soviets ended the agreement in 1961, the U.S. blew a 1,280-foot-wide crater into the the Limited Test Ban Treaty prohibited any nuclear explosion that sent radioactivity over a nation's borders. Panama and Alaska were spared by having neighbors. Interactive Television
Warner Cable brought the first interactive TV system to Columbus, Ohio in 1977. The Qube came with an 18-button remote control and a cable box that sent and received data at 256K per second, five times the speed of a 56K modem. Subscribers got access to 30 channels, including pay-per-view movies. Three years later American Express invested $175 million to form Warner-Amex Cable, offering the Qube in Dallas. The company spent $23 million to get 50,000 subscribers in Columbus. But viewers were turned off by the higher prices: $40 for a standard cable box and $200 for the Qube.
Warner-Amex cable built out the Qube network in eight communities, until American Express sold its stake to Warner for $450 million after a disastrous year in 1983 in which the partnership lost $150 million. Warner Cable started boxing up the Qube in 1984. Unlimited Solar Power get solar power. The atmosphere filters out most of the sun's radiation and at night there's no sun at all. In 1968 Peter Glaser, a consultant who had managed projects on NASA lunar missions, suggested solar power collectors could be sent into outer space, where the sun's rays are unfettered. Power could be converted into an electromagnetic beam and sent back to Earth.
So in the 1970s NASA and the Energy Department spent $20 million on a grand plan: 60 orbiting satellites would infuse the U.S. electric grid with 300 gigawatts of electricity. But a new fleet of shuttles to place and maintain the satellites was the costly impediment. Price tag: $108 billion.
NASA still hasn't given up. Since renewing the solar power collecting satellite program in 1999, it's dropped about $25 million on Glaser's vision.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): Convertible: The Arrowbile could drive and fly.
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): The first Videophone display was palm-size construction?
PHOTO (BLACK &; WHITE): 3-D flopped: Audiences prefer flat screens.
By Michael Maiello
Section: 200 Best Small Companies Cliff Hudson revitalized a regional chain of drive-in fast-food joints. Can he take it national?
Sonic Corp. is but one-fifth the size of McDonald's domestic burger business. But, unlike its larger rival, it doesn't have to worry about pretending to be health-conscious or luring kids with plastic toys from the latest aniflick. A determinedly retro fast-food organization, the Oklahoma City-based chain of drive-ins still has a stubbornly high-calorie menu delivered by 1950s-style carhops on roller blades. How hard is it to screw up that formula?
Pretty easy, apparently. Which is why J. Clifford Hudson grimaces at the memory of taking over in 1995 as chief executive, a decade after he'd joined as house counsel. For starters, menus differed from store to store -- Slaw Dogs served up in the Carolinas; ice cream sundaes peddled by a renegade franchisee in Texas; deep-fried "Pickle-Os" furtively sold in Sonic's own backyard. Even within the same city, it was easy to find radical taste variations in Tater Tots because franchisees started there. Drive-ins had undergone only the most superficial touch-ups since the company's founding in 1953, and were peeling relics. Accounting? Still done manually, meaning that September's quarterly statements from franchisees weren't available until four months later, and were prone to errors. Company pitchman Frankie Avalon -- a teen idol when Sonic was founded -- left today's youngsters scratching their heads. Franchisees, operating 1,438 regional drive-ins then, were fuming. "It was time for the brand to grow up," recalls Hudson, 47, slamming his **25;2750;TOOLONG fist on the table.
Today, it's a different story. Sonic hasn't changed its formula; it's just gotten better at standardizing it. Skechers-skating teens serve up a quirky variety of artery-hardening tasties like Ex-Long Cheese Coney hot dogs, Ched' R' Peppers and Banana Cream Pie Shakes in its 2,471 stores, mostly in the Sunbelt. For the last five years, the home office has enjoyed 17% and 28% annual average sales and profit on $330 million in sales (it ranks number 47 in the 200 Best list). Franchisees are no longer in revolt: Average unit revenues have grown 5% a year since 1997 to a current $874,000. And same-store sales have increased 16 consecutive years, up 3.1% in the fiscal third quarter ended May 31 (compared with a 1.6% drop for McDonald's).
Hardly gloating, Cliff Hudson can't forget what it took to get Sonic's sizzle back. In 1986 he joined a group of Sonic executives that took the company private for $10 million, a combination of cash from insiders, venture funding and a loan from Heller Financial.
That turned out to be the easy part. Hudson, who received his law degree from Georgetown, was executing new contracts for franchisees that raised their royalty rates. He got an earful from them and the four franchisee groups on Sonic's executive board. Not a happy constituency: More than 300 units had closed, and here was headquarters demanding a doubling royalties. In one instance, as Hudson was negotiating a vendor deal with Coca- Cola, 500 franchisees banded together and signed with Pepsi. (He phased out that agreement later on.) Sonic's 110 company-owned stores were losing a total of $1.5 million a year.
Later, Hudson was supervising Sonic's $31 million public offering in 1991. (Most of the proceeds went to pay down bank debt.) Within two years Hudson became chief operating officer, responsible for helping the company rediscover growth. He unloaded unprofitable divisions like the equipment sales unit, and pushed for modern computer systems to expedite accounting procedures and make better purchasing and sales projections.
By the time he was named chief executive, Hudson hit a wall again. Franchisees were demanding new and longer license contracts a full five years before they were set to expire. Franchisees felt neglected. They weren't getting training or purchasing services, and that was driving up costs. Franchisee-owned stores were taking in an average $577,000 each, 79% home office was horning in on their turf, sometimes opening stores just miles away. Franchisees wanted exclusive rights to build in certain markets and more decision-making power. "There was the perception that they kept a lot of secrets from franchisees," says Bobby. J. Merritt, a partner in 140 Sonic stores. "Cliff had to prove his credibility."
Hudson was willing to meet them halfway -- even though an agreement took 13 grueling months. Franchisees could have 20-year contracts, with options to renew for another decade. They could join a revamped advisory council. Master franchisees could have first crack at new markets and protection from company encroachment.
But in return Hudson demanded consistency in menu and vendor deals for the first time in company history. He required cooperative purchasing and advertising. And franchisees would have to pay up: Fees doubled to $30,000 and royalties moved up as high as 5% of gross revenues, depending on sales volume. Most franchisees swallowed hard. Those who stayed followed Merritt's least it meant we were making more."
At the same time, Hudson took a mop to headquarters. He brought in experienced fast-food executives, like Frank B. Young, a Wendy's alumnus, to run the company-owned restaurants division, and Michael Shumsky, a Taco Bell veteran, to oversee operations. Andrew Ritger, a onetime Hardee's executive, slashed costs throughout the system -- from more efficient shipping to trimming the number of Sonic's five hamburger patty sizes down to two: regular and kid-size. By 2001, operating expenses were down to 73% of the average franchisee's sales.
But instead of whacking costs in the parent company, Hudson was spending more -- expenses rose 46% to $19 million between 1995 and 1997 -- to execute Sonic's boom. "If you're a growth company, you need to invest in people," he says. "Otherwise you're going to end up killing yourself."
Some of that money was going toward building a brand, at, who sits on the board. Pattye Moore, a well-liked marketing executive in the firm, was promoted to oversee the company's new image. And franchisees, who'd always had to kick in as much as 3.25% of gross revenues for a local ad fund and another 0.75% for national campaigns, now saw some results.
Sonic hired Kansas City-based Barkley Evergreen &; Partners, responsible for successful campaigns for Cellular One and Western Auto. The company bought time on cable channels, where ads focused on a fresh, albeit odd, menu that featured cherry limeades, onion rings and sandwiches served on thick toaster bread -- all delivered to the car in under four minutes. Frankie Avalon was shown the door, in favor of young skating carhops. Last year the company spent $80 million on marketing, triple what it had spent five years earlier.
For the first time Sonic began to use market research and focus groups to discern customer tastes. The results: Patrons had tastes that were even weirder than Cokes and burgers with mayo and mustard. Hudson reportedly spent $6 million over two years for point-of-sales terminals that could track customer trends. When Sonic learned that ice cream sundaes accounted for as much as 30% of one Texas franchisee's sales, the company stopped hassling him to discontinue the program and copied it for the entire chain. Typically humdrum after-dinner sales, desserts mostly, now account for 17% of Sonic's sales, versus 2% for most other chains. And Hudson aims to up that percentage, since diners don't penny-pinch at dessert time. "Anything you can mix with air or water will always be more profitable," he explains.
Two years ago the chain completed a Jetsonsesque remodeling program that cost franchisees an average $75,000 per store. How easy was that? Hudson first had to fix up Sonic-owned stores to prove the concept, then took HQ's results on a road show, hearing the usual complaints, but proving his point. Hudson credits the new look for boosting average sales per good at selling instead of forcing," notes Chuck Harrison, partner in of one of Sonic's largest franchise groups, with 280 stores.
Hudson's focus these days is beefing up morning business, which accounts for a mere 3% of revenues, against the 11% industry average. The new breakfast menu, which includes typically off-the-wall Sonic savories like a pancake-wrapped sausage and Fruit Taquitos, is already rolled out in 47% of the chain. Some stores are already seeing a 7% bounce in sales.
Midwesterners and New Englanders yearning for a Sonic burger will have to wait, though. There are no imminent plans to go national. Still, the coast-to-coast ads that began running two years ago on Lifetime and ESPN are likely to create demand in new markets. A few kinks still need to be worked out-as in, how to deal with regions that have real seasons. Who wants to roll down a window in bad weather?
Franchisees are keeping Hudson in line, fearful of saturation. One boulevard to five Sonic restaurants. Wall Street is also mindful of the too much, too soon syndrome. At $24, Sonic's stock is trading at 17 times expected earnings, and is down 27% from its summer high. But its five-year total annualized return of 20% still runs circles around McDonald's, Wendy's and Taco Bell. And considering that some 20 states still haven't experienced a pimply-faced skater serving up a SuperSonic cheeseburger and cream pie shake, expansion is an intriguing possibility. By the Numbers Chew on This
Guess which country has one of the world's highest obesity rates?
44 billion The number of hamburgers Americans eat each year.
$115 billion What the U.S. will spend on fast food this year. 55 pounds The average annual per capita consumption of french fries in America. 127 seconds Average drive-thru service time at Wendy's, the fastest chain in the U.S.
PHOTO (COLOR): Turning the tables: Hudson once had a mess on his hands.
PHOTO (cost of a Jetsonesque makeover.
PHOTO (COLOR): Dynamic duo: Sonic President Pattye Moore and Chief Hudson.
By Lea Goldman
// JERRY FALWELL may have apologized for asserting that God has lifted "His protective hand" from America because gays and lesbians, abortionists and liberal advocacy groups "have tried to secularize America" (News, Sept. 26-Oct. 3). But does contrition signal that his view of God's character has changed? Falwell's God of vengeance has repeatedly whipped him into frenzies of condemnation and judgment. In this, Falwell's God differs only in degree but not in kind from the God of Osama bin Laden, who interpreted the horrific events of September 11 as "retribution from God." Is it truly in God's character to "tramp out grapes of wrath"? Or shall we turn to the common witness of Judaism, Islam and Christianity, to a God of justice and mercy, "slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love"? These opposing views can not be reconciled. The character of God matters. Craig Anderson Brookside Community Church, Brookside, N.J. Words of appreciation .. I HAVE ALWAYS liked your work, but the September 26-October the events of September 11 were as helpful and thoughtful as any I have seen, and better than most. I am particularly struck that you took the time and space to include eyewitness accounts as well as the excellent opening editorial, the everthoughtful words of Barbara Brown Taylor, the very useful items by Jon Gunnemann, Gilbert Meilaender and Trudy Bush, and of course James Wall and Martin Marty. Rob Elder First Presbyterian Church, Salem, Ore. As a subscriber since seminary days, I have found the CHRISTIAN CENTURY to be interesting and provocative reading. But I have found it to be absolutely essential reading in the past few weeks. As I struggled to say something comforting and challenging -- as well as theologically sound-to my people in recent weeks, I welcomed the arrival of my CENTURY as never before. In particular, the entire "In the face of evil" issue (Sept. 26-Oct. 3), John Buchanan's "To think and act anew" (Oct. 10) and the editorial "been greatly helpful. Thank you. Rebekah Simon-Peter First United Methodist Church, Rawlins, Wyo. Martin Marty recognizes the "people whose year-in, year-out steadfastness" pays the bills and keeps the church doors open for times like these, and who keep alive the "vocabulary of prayer" and the "stories that give meaning" ("America at prayer," Sept. 26-Oct. 3). While we in the local church appreciate Marty's thoughts, they also fit him, you and all the people who work at your fine magazine. Because you all faithfully attend to your duty in times when there is no particular crisis to speak of, you were in position to publish an extraordinary issue about the terrorist attacks. Just when many ministers like myself were out of words to articulate both our feelings and our faith, the CENTURY arrived, promising depth with its somber cover and its title, "In the face of evil." I found refreshment, insight and energy to rejoin the challenge of these Church, Anchorage, Ky. Training pastors... PIVOTAL LEADERSHIP," by L. Gregory Jones and Susan Pendleton Jones (Sept. 12-19), is unfairly written and full of generalities. The authors take little or no account of the great emphasis on pastoral care in congregations and seminaries for the last 80 years. The authors lift up an "inappropriate" response in a prison setting by a chaplain described in Sister Helen Prejean's Dead Man Walking. Many pastors, including me, have been extensively trained in pastoral care and CPE. I wish the authors would give credit to those who offer support and guidance to persons suffering from loss and stress after the event of September 11. I wish they would give credit to pastors who move beyond the local congregations to participate in community vigils, Holocaust interfaith commemorations, and feeding and homeless programs. The authors throw around terms like "spiritual life," "pastoral wisdom" and "imagination" with little or no definition. Frankly, I appreciate the influence pioneers the seminary classroom, institutional setting and congregational life. Russell E. Gundlach Eastchester, N.Y. Gregory Jones and Susan Pendleton Jones have been awarded $10 million for discovering that ten-talent pastors make weak congregations strong, and one-talent pastors make strong churches weak. I wonder what the Lilly Foundation would give me for discovering that grass is green? The authors suggest that ten-talent persons stopped going to seminary "about 30 years ago," which was when liberation theology, with its egalitarian ideology, was breaking out in seminaries like measles in a kindergarten class. Part of this ideology was that only an unjust God would give ten talents to one person and one to another. A truly just God would give five talents to all. In this context, why would truly talented persons enter ministry? It was during this time that the Consultation on Church Union constructed a document on ordination that was filled with shame because ordination seemed to introduce a class structure into the church. In the past 30 years I do not remember interviewing her leadership style with these words: "I am an enabler; I do not lead from in front, but from beside my congregation." (I am the Good Shepherd; the sheep lead themselves.) Our seminaries have made our seminary students ashamed of their talents and ashamed to be leaders. We have sown mediocrity and reaped mediocrity. This is a discovery? Barry H. Downing Endwell, N.Y It is easy to see why teachers would conclude that the important need right now is better students and a stronger dose of training and teaching. They believe that now, at last, they have a handle on just what the training should look like. I do ask, out of respect for those of us who are well trained and have worked hard and long, that they consider the following observation. The last 30 years has seen an explosion of clergy training. D.Min. degrees abound. CPE flourishes. Seminars on every subject from MBTI to intensive journaling have sprung up like weeds. The current trained and taught ever. Why do we think that more, even if different, training of pastors will help create faithful, effective congregations where they do not now exist? Thomas Russell First Christian Church, St. Joseph, Mo. L. Gregory Jones and Susan Pendleton Jones respond: Obviously, not everything that needs to be said can be said in one article that, by necessity, painted with a large brush. However, these letters offer an opportunity to clarify several areas of misunderstanding: * Our article was written and at the typesetter long before the tragic events of September 11. Had it been written subsequent to that event, we would have commended those who have offered powerful witness and care in response to the tragedy. We would suggest that it is precisely those congregations and pastors who are already engaged in faithful and vital ministry who had the most to draw on in this time of crisis. * We see pastoral care as neither the saving grace (as does Russell Gundlach) nor the problem or of seminary education; all of the disciplines are implicated in both positive and negative ways. We do not think more training is necessarily the answer; we rather advocate a different pattern of education and formation. We do not think, as does Thomas Russell, that the current pastoral leadership is "the best trained and taught ever." Those of us in seminaries need to take responsibility for not providing the best training and teaching we could. We do think we can help to reclaim connections between seminaries and congregations, and to raise the bar again of expectations and hopes for clergy, congregations and seminaries. * The challenges and problems we face emerged over time; solutions will also take time and multiple collaborative efforts. Our intention is to promote deeper and stronger relationships, not assign blame. * The grant that Duke Divinity School received was not related to some "discovery"; it is designed to develop programs that can help address crucial challenges, including weaknesses in the education we provide. Nonviolent protest an ecumenical interfaith movement to support a mass nonviolent action in American corridors of power on behalf of the voiceless of the Middle East ("Non -- violent protest in Palestine," Aug. 29-Sept. 5). I strongly believe that there is an untapped new generation of social activists ready to take on "one of the worst apartheid systems in the world through a mobilization of the faith community." Why does not some peace group or coalition of activists organize teach-ins and public demonstrations in U.S. universities, schools, media centers and service groups to cry out for space in the Middle East for nonviolent protest? Those of us who were involved in these activities in the Vietnam War era know that this will work. Who will take the first steps to mobilize such an effort? John H. Sinclair Roseville, Minn. Surprised by beauty... THANK YOU for "Surprised by beauty," by Roberta Bondi (Aug. 29-Sept. 5). Her frank self-acceptance is refreshing and has helped me appreciate more the meaning of "Prout Woodland, Calif.
Motor restorer Paul Russell tunes up Ralph Lauren's other collection
On March 6, 2005, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston opened a new exhibit of 16 20th-century works of art -- not from the studios of Picasso, Chagall, Matisse, Pollock or Stella, but from the workshops of Bentley, Mercedes, Bugatti, Alfa Romeo, Jaguar, Porsche and Ferrari -- all from Ralph Lauren's personal collection. Among them was the 1958 Ferrari 250 Testa Rossa, which seemed to be doing 150 miles an hour while sitting still, the otherworldly 1938 Bugatti type 57SC Atlantic, with its exoskeleton of riveted spines along the flared fenders and over the swoop of body and hood, and the 1955 Porsche 550 Spyder. Stand next to that one, and you have no trouble understanding James Dean's temptation to put the pedal down in his and blast out the other side of the envelope on that fatal road near Paso Robles. These cars are not the cocoons of metal and glass that carry us silently, belted tight, from one place to another backseat and the navigation system makes sure we don't suffer the inconvenience of a wrong turn. They are beautiful, howling, luminous rockets that demand the open road, the double-clutch downshift into the tight turn and a destination too far away to reach in a day.
Of the 16 cars from Ralph Lauren's collection exhibited in Boston, 14 of them are cared for (and 7 of those were restored) by Paul Russell and Company. Russell specializes in handbuilt prewar cars (not that war -- World War II) and cars of the ' 50s, machines of great beauty and/or historic importance. He runs one of those increasingly rare establishments where meticulous craftsmanship and art intersect to produce something unique.
The company is housed in a workaday, one-story 30,000-square-foot concrete-block facility a few miles from the sea in Essex, Massachusetts. On a cold, gray March day, a couple of' 50s-era Mercedes-Benz sedans are parked outside. Their paint is dull, the chrome pitted and flaking, the upholstery defeated. They're the "before" picture.
Step into the building, and you immediately see the "after." Crouched in the corner of the lobby is the sinuous, predatory 1930 Mercedes-Benz "Count Trossi" SSK. Its black paint and chrome gleam. The leather upholstery is immaculate. There are no blemishes on the scalloped aluminum dashboard. The car is as perfect as it was when Count Carlo Felice Trossi, the aristocratic Italian race-car driver, received it from its English coach builders.
The perfection goes well beneath the surface. When the Russell company was restoring the car, workers discovered that the oil pan was stamped with a manufacturer's number that showed it came from another engine. After extensive research, Paul Russell flew to Germany and, flashlight in hand, found the original oil pan in the corner of an old garage. The Bugatti Atlantic and Count Trossi SSK won Best of Show at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance in 1990 and 1993 respectively -- the most distinguished award shop is a 1949 Ferrari 166MM Berlinetta. It won the 1950 Mille Miglia (hence the MM), that quintessentially Italian form of motor madness: a thousand miles of open-road race from Brescia to Rome and back. The race was run from 1927 to 1957. One of the first restoration decisions Paul Russell and the car's owner must make is: To what year is the car being restored? Is the desired end result the car that rolled out of the Ferrari factory in 1949, or the car that won the race after various modifications? Once they decide, the intense research begins. Factory photographs and records are scrutinized, photographs and documents studied, differences noted. Were there new mirrors for the race? Was the suspension altered? Do the wheels match the factory wheels? All these details have to be replicated to bring the car back to the desired historic moment.
Since cars coming into the Russell shop are 50 years old or more, chances are that they have been repainted at original paint, the cars themselves can. Often when the mechanics dismantle the car they find the original paint pristine and protected in hidden places, such as behind the rims of the gauges removed from the dashboard. Paint chips are analyzed and the original paint reconstituted. Some restorations brush up against current law: It's illegal now to use asbestos in brake pads, and lacquer paint, not uncommon prewar, is prohibited in most states. Russell and his specialists have contrived a paint that maintains the character of a lacquer-painted body without flouting the law.
The machine shop duplicates parts that can't be found. Today on the premises is a 1933 Alfa 8C 2300 coupe that has been dismantled. The metal skin has been pulled off to reveal the horse-drawn carriage that was the recent ancestor of many of the prewar cars. Unlike the postwar Ferrari here, almost the entire structure of the Alfa's passenger compartment is neatly fitted with joined pieces of hand-worked wood on which the metal sheathing was then hung.. The damaged pieces will be carefully resected, duplicated and refitted by Richard Docking, a member of the English coach-builders guild in his early 40s.
The waiting list to have a car restored here is about two years. Once accepted, owners are consulted at every step and receive written reports and photos of the work as it progresses. It takes about 2,500 man-hours to restore postwar cars, and about 4,000 or more for prewar vehicles. The hourly rates -- less than those of your local Mercedes dealership -- run about $95.
What you get at the end is a work of art. Kinetic sculpture, though you wouldn't hang it on a wall. And it will run. Turn the key, heave the crank, hear that engine roar. Get behind the wheel, find first gear, put the pedal down and summon the Count Trossi hidden within you to come out for a run.

Paul Russell and Company, 106 Western Ave., Essex, MA 01929; (Not quite ready for its close-up, a vintage Ferrari awaits a makeover at the Paul Russell shop.
PHOTO (COLOR): Hammer time
PHOTO (COLOR):' 50s-era Mercedes, post-Russell
By David Taylor
Nearly half the league will begin the season with a new starting point guard, but making a change at the "one" always is a delicate experiment By DAVE D'ALESSANDRO // Looking back, Mark Jackson says it was like walking into a room filled with a dozen people, all talking at once, their voices a discordant blur and the conversation pitched too low for him to understand. He was certain he spoke the Knicks' language when he came over in a trade from the Raptors last February. He had worked with coach Jeff Van Gundy before, there was nothing about the Knicks' system he hadn't encountered already, and he even felt the kind of comfort and familiarity that comes with returning to his hometown. Now, Jackson admits he didn't know what he was getting into. Only once in his 14-year career had he changed teams in midseason, but that was very different because he returned to an Indiana team he played for only months earlier. "I was brand new again, and they were new to me as teammates, the Knicks last February. "The thing is, I didn't want to just come in here and take over. So I pretty much held back all those things I would normally say and do, because I didn't want to step on their toes. It was a tough, tough situation. I'll never forget it" Over the next two months, there were some minor successes, a few glimmers of hope. But even as the Knicks claimed they could respond to the kind of leadership Jackson provided, the offense often ran as smoothly as a rhino in high heels. For the first time in a decade, the Knicks were bounced out of the postseason in the first round. An unsettled point guard situation, which is not uncommon in New York, was one factor in the team's demise. "It had nothing to do with the players," Jackson says. "It had to do with me." Such laments are as old as John Stockton. Take it Taking over a new team as the starting point guard is one of the most difficult things to do in basketball," says the Spurs" Terry Porter, 38, who has done it as successfully as anyone. "Number one, you have to take it upon yourself to know the ins and outs of a new system because you are responsible for directing everybody. Then you have to get used to the personnel and their skill level: what they need to do, what they like to do-which is not always the same thing-and what they don't like to do. And most of all, you have to become the leader, because that's the most important part of the job." Changing of the guards Nearly half of the league's teams-between 11 and 13-will have new starters at the point guard position this season (last season began with only three such changes). Seven teams will hand the job to players who come from outside the system, and all of them will have challenges league's best players and teams are making changes. In Phoenix, Stephon Marbury will be asked to inspire Penny Hardaway to play and inspire the fans to return. In New Jersey, the Nets need Jason Kidd to help them purge a quarter-century of wretched luck and farcical blunders. In Sacramento, the Kings are asking Mike Bibby to be the difference between style and substance. Grant Hill, a career small forward, is testing out the position in Orlando, and even last season's finalists, the 76ers and the Lakers, will have to experiment until their starters return from serious injuries. Some teams will succeed, others will fail miserably. In most cases, the point guard will be credited for the former or blamed for the latter. And with few exceptions, the point guard will accept either fate, because he considers it part of the job description. Photograph Bibby (Kings), Davis (Hawks), Hill (Magic) and Williams (Grizzlies) are running the point for four position. Photograph Bibby (Kings), Davis (Hawks), Hill (Magic) and Williams (Grizzlies) are running the point for four of the many teams that are changing starters at the position. // "That's fair," Kidd concedes. "We all understand what we have to do. There are going to be new schemes, new plays. But when you get right down to it, it's playing basketball. And the point guards who have changed jobs or cities, it comes down to executing and making sure you take care of the ball. It is a challenge. Some guys are up to it, and some guys aren't. You find out very quickly who's up for that challenge. "Orlando coach Doc Rivers, who changed teams three times in his playing career, believes the first step is credible leadership. "You have to get a team's trust early," Rivers says. "With a guy like Kidd, I don't other hand, when you have a point guard like Stephon, who is more of a scorer than the guys in Phoenix are used to, you could see problems if things don't work out early for them." Wiser is better Because a point guard's greatest development often takes place between the ears, it is said that veterans stand the best chance of adapting to a new environment or greater responsibility. Consider Avery Johnson, who signed with Denver in the offseason. At 36, he can't run the Nuggets with the same flair as starter Nick Van Exel, but he is not going to be caught unprepared. He knew that during the very first practice, when he connected with Antonio McDyess on a pair of alley-oop passes for dunks. "It wasn't osmosis or anything," Johnson says. "I've just been watching Nick throwing him the same passes. Because of the explosion of TV-and because I'm a quote-unquote basketball junkie-I watch basketball all the time. It's easier year as opposed to my fifth or sixth year." "You might get slower as you get older, but you get wiser," Porter says. "You have a better feel for how the game's going, knowing its rhythms, knowing which guy's number to call." It isn't their intent to question the logic of turning a team over to someone without experience. Johnson and Porter believe that every point guard has to start somewhere. In San Antonio, however, the transition carries some risk. Antonio Daniels is the Spurs' point guard now. It is a job Johnson held for 61/2 years, and it's a job Porter did far better than Daniels a year ago. The numbers proved it: With Johnson out because of injury, Daniels tried his hand as a starter, and the Spurs went 11-8. Then Porter took over, and the Spurs won 30 of his next 37 starts as Daniels slid over to shooting guard. But it's Daniels' turn handing a title contender over to a novice. Least of all Porter. "He's athletic enough, he can get his own shots, and he's getting better by the day," Porter says. "We talk a lot about what he has to master, how to be creative without overlooking our strengths. Now the important thing is staying in control, running the team and getting the coaching staff's trust." The same scenario is being tried at Golden State, which is giving Larry Hughes a spin. The purists shudder. Hughes is not exactly a pass-first point, his assist average (4.5 per game last season) notwithstanding. Nor has he been durable, missing 32 games last season. But he has the endorsement of the team's star, Antawn Jamison, and the Warriors hope that force-feeding him responsibility will pay off sooner rather than later. "The one is his position," Jamison says. "Though he hasn't played it, he's always had then't think we can be successful without him. I see him as a successful point guard." Mookie Blaylock, who will start if the Hughes experiment fails, is less effusive: "Point guard's a tough job," says Blaylock, entering his 13th season. "Eventually, he'll get it, though it takes time. If not this year, next year." Mark Jackson doesn't have that luxury. He is not new to his team, but he is 36, and he believes that half a season and a full camp will make all the difference. "Night and day," he says. "It's much tougher to change in midseason. That's not an excuse; that's reality." Photograph Kidd says the Nets can make the jump from 26 victories to a .500 record this season. Sidebar A time for change Sidebar The reasons behind all the point guard changes heading into this season: Bulls (from Bryce Drew Sidebar to Greg Anthony) team, and Anthony, an 11-year veteran, was available for the bargain Sidebar price of a second-round pick. Grizzlies (from Mike Bibby to Jason Williams): The Grizzlies are going to lose anyway, so why not do it with flair and sell a few tickets in the process? Hawks (from Brevin Knight to Sidebar Emanuel Davis): Knight was too short (5-10) to team with undersized shooting guard Jason Terry (6-2). Heat (from Tim Hardaway to Anthony Carter): Hardaway kept getting injured at playoff time, so Pat Riley Sidebar turned to a younger, less talented player. Kings (from Jason Williams to Mike Bibby): Sacramento lost confidence in Williams, whose wild shot selection and horrid defense landed him on the bench late in games last season. Sidebar Lakers (from Derek Fisher to Lindsey Hunter): Fisher will miss the season's first month with a foot injury. Hunter, acquired in the offseason from the Bucks, is the leader of a pack Armstrong to Grant Hill): Orlando must find a way to mesh Hill with Tracy McGrady, and this move will keep the two from bumping into each other on the wings. Sidebar Nets (from Stephon Marbury to Jason Kidd): Few Nets liked playing with the score-first Marbury, and when the league's best pure point guard is available, you listen. Pistons (from Chucky Atkins to Dana Sidebar Barros): Atkins still is around, and this training camp battle could go either way. 76ers (from Eric Snow to Speedy Claxton): Snow is out indefinitely with a severe thumb injury. Claxton could be next in line, but the team hasn't ruled out bringing in Rod Strickland. Sidebar Spurs (from Terry Porter to Antonio Daniels): Porter, 38, is too old to be a regular starter, and Daniels proved himself as a shooting guard last season. Suns (from Jason Kidd to Stephen Marbury): Phoenix fans had lost interest in a team that never wins steadiness for flash. Warriors (from Mookie Blaylock to Larry Hughes): This job remains Blaylock's to lose, but Hughes will get Sidebar every chance to prove he can move over Trom shooting guard because Blaylock, 34, is too old to play there much longer. -Dan Graf Sidebar A Nets revival -- no kidding Sidebar At 6 a.m. on October 2, Jason Kidd took his physical as a new member of the Nets. A few hours later, he arrived at his first practice. Exhausted from a five-hour flight the night before and already sleep-deprived since the arrival of twin daughters earlier that week, he immediately tried to make up for lost time. The Nets went through a shooting drill early in the session, and Kidd volunteered for rebounding duty. He threw passes in the general direction of Keith Van Horn-some a foot high, some a foot wide. He flung a few dozen at Kerry Kittles, at times intentionally throwing them toward the shooting guard's sore knees or at his head., how quickly they could retarget the rim, their shooting rhythms, even their expressions. "A game within a game that I play," Kidd explains. "High, low, at the chest. Just throw it where they have to reach for it to see where they are better at catching and shooting. Or do they need to put the ball on the floor first? I was just feeling them out." The subtleties of passing are not lost on Kidd, who led the NBA in assists the last three seasons. The subtleties of leadership are more elusive, though he is off to an excellent start with his new teammates. On the night before the first practice, coach Byron Scott decided to test Kidd. After Kidd arrived at his hotel, seconds away from stepping into the shower, Scott called to let him know he would be the team's captain. "And I want you to address the team in 20 minutes," he added. Sidebar This is the. He made that clear in his first press gathering, shortly after he and Stephon Marbury traded jobs, by announcing he believed the Nets would be a .500 team this season. It was an extraordinary statement. The Nets won only 26 games last year and have reached the postseason once in the fast seven seasons. To suggest they will be in the playoff hunt-by virtue of changing just one player-is more optimistic than anyone in New Jersey has a right to be. "It is a leap," Kidd admits. "When you look at this team, it's very young -- our oldest guy is 30. But I just felt we had to set a goal. Maybe I'm speaking out of turn, but I've come from a team that won 50 games a year. I'm not used to anything less than .500. That's where I thought we should set our goal as a team, and if we don't believe in that, then we won't be able to covers the NBA for the Newark (N.J.) Star-Ledger. //
Soaring above all comers, second-year sensation DWYANE WADE has taken over as Miami's best player // It is becoming the dirty little secret that no one in the Miami Heat organization seems willing to acknowledge. Not as long as Shaquille O'Neal maintains an ego as enormous as his stature. Not as long as Dwyane Wade remains remarkably humble for a player who has captivated the basketball universe in leading the Heat into the Eastern Conference finals. But the reality rests in the numbers and in the results. The best player on the Heat wears No. 3, not No. 32. He is at his best playing above the rim, not rattling the rim. He gets to the foul line and basks instead of bricks." If you don't see it now, you'll see it very soon, "Pacers scout Jimmy Powell says." I don't think Shaq will ever say he's Dwyane's "supporting player. "But Dwyane's 23, and Shaq's 33. Shaq's got only two or three more good years in this league. and he's going to have to take a back seat just to save his body." Case in point: Bothered by a deep thigh bruise, O'Neal sat out the last two games of the Heat's second-round sweep of the Wizards, giving him a front-row seat as Wade scored 31 and 42 points. The extra rest gave Shaq 12 days to try to get healthy before the Heat started its series against the Pistons. By the time the Wizards series was over, some of the Washington players were wondering whether they would have been better off with O'Neal on the court, forcing Heat coach Stan Van Gundy back into the equal-opportunity offense in which Wade averaged 24.1 points and O'Neal 22.9 during the regular season. "He's putting them on his back, and he's giving them the confidence that every time they go on the court they can win," Wizards forward Antawn Jamison says of the Heat's second-year guard. "He's phenomenal." "With his will and his determination, to another level," Wizards coach Eddie Jordan says. Even the Big Spectator is impressed. "The last 10 years, draft picks have been coming in 40 percent talent and 60 percent marketing," Shaq says. "The only advantages those guys have over him are the Nike contracts and the commercials. Dwyane is a player, and nobody knew about him. 1 knew he was a player, but I didn't know he would go to the next level so fast." If he had a runaway ego, Wade would be the closest thing in the NBA to Kobe Bryant. But that also would make him an undesirable to O'Neal. Wade knows that; the Heat appreciates that. So Wade leans toward a selflessness that makes him the perfect O'Neal teammate. "I don't care if people think I'm the best player or if they don't," Wade says. "As long as my team is the best, I'm not going to worry about it." Wade so far has excelled. To share the spotlight with O'Neal without either casting a shadow or getting caught in one is a daunting challenge. Fail to heed the wisdom of O'Neal, and mockery ensues. Fail to provide ample support, and the inside-outside magic disappears. "When we played Shaq and Kobe in the (2000) Finals, they had great chemistry, and I think that was a big part of why they were so successful," Powell says. "1 think as they grew further and further apart, the chemistry certainly was a lot worse." Photograph // In O'Neal and Wade, Powell sees bliss. "It's the start of a new relationship, and, obviously, the start of it has gone really well for them," he says. "Dwyane Wade, any big man would love to play with him. He gives everything he has and is talented. And I think the combination of those two, whether they can be as good as Shaq and's possible." Van Gundy says the relationship works because each cashes in on the other's assets. "The confidence level is the biggest thing Dwyane gains from Shaq," Van Gundy says. "With a great player like Shaq next to you, you have great confidence you're going to win. It takes a little bit of the pressure off of you. You just see another great player and his confidence and how he carries himself and the poise and everything else. I think that rubs off a little bit." As for O'Neal's net gain from Wade, Van Gundy says it's more of an intangible. "What he's done, in my estimation, is he's sort of helped Shaq's enthusiasm come back-to play with another great player, who Shaq looks at differently, as somebody who's very unselfish," Van Gundy says, careful to avoid invoking Bryant's name. "I think there's a great appreciation for each other there and a real high It's two great players working together to make it work on the team, and I think that's what has made our chemistry as good as it is." Wade looks up to O'Neal, in both tangible and figurative ways. "He's impacted me more by being a big brother type," Wade says. "Anytime I need any advice, on whether it comes to marketing, whether it comes to life, he's always there to give me advice because he's been through everything." Dwyane's game The expectation this season was that O'Neal would overwhelm double- and triple-teams in the post, creating the type of space on the perimeter for Wade that Lamar Odom and Caron Butler could not last season. Instead, Wade often has been beating the double- and tripleteams, leaving O'Neal alone under the hoop to feast on alley-oops and unchallenged putbacks. "Dwyane Wade is to the point where you have to game-plan against him," Jordan says. In some ways, Wade is almost down defenses. The difference is Iverson is 165 pounds of slipperiness; Wade is 212 pounds of muscle. Still, "When you put two guys on him," Jordan says, "he just splits them." If there is a book on Wade, it is to force him right. "If you look at all the graphs, his percentage is so much higher on the left quadrant of the floor," Jordan says. So the Wizards tried to push Wade right. In Game 3, the strategy worked for a half, with Wade shooting 5-for-12 and committing six turnovers. Wade disarmed the strategy in the second half, shooting 9-for-15 with only two turnovers. "Once he started taking what they were giving him, he took the ball right and dunked. He took the ball right in transition and got a layup. Late in the game, he took the ball right and made a big layup. He went three times to his right and made jumpers," Van Gundy he can't go to his right hand. "Photograph Wade's low-key personality has enabled him to share the spotlight easily with Shaq. // With the 6-4 Wade playing point guard last season alongside 6-6 shooting guard Eddie Jones, it was particularly difficult to smother Wade with size. But with Wade back at shooting guard next to 6-3 point guard Damon Jones, putting a larger guard or a small forward on Wade might be the best way to stop him. The Pistons made that work particularly well in the teams' final regular-season meeting, blanketing Wade with 6-9 small forward Tayshaun Prince and his long arms. Wade shot l-for-6 and fouled out in an 80-72 loss. Like... Heat President Pat Riley says a comparison is brewing. "I think instead of calling someone Jordanesque, it's going to be called Wadenesque," Riley says. "The difference is Dwyane's not as angular. Michael was 6-6 and long. Dywane's in more of a compact package." Jordan comparisons, of course,n't it the Heat that drafted Harold "Baby Jordan" Miner?) But before dismissing this one as preposterous, consider it in these terms: where Jordan was in his second year and where Wade stands today. Jordan didn't have the likes of Shaq on his side, but he also didn't take his team to the conference finals until his fifth season. Jordan's influences on Wade are undeniable. Growing up on the South Side in Chicago, Wade was 9 when Jordan won his first championship, 16 when Jordan celebrated his sixth. "When you're young, you're like a sponge," Wade says. "You're taking everything in. That was one of the best teams the game has ever seen. I've just picked that up and tried to carry it over. Without even thinking about it, I think it's a part of me now." Kevin Loughery, who coached Jordan during his first NBA season, says the comparison has merit. "The I saw in Wade," Loughery says. "Going one-on-one, he could get to the hoop with anybody. And finish. And hang in the air. That's what makes these guys. Defensively, they're both very good. Michael turned into a great defensive player. I think that Wade can do the same thing. He blocks shots. His anticipation is fantastic. I really think he might be the most underrated player in the league." Steve Kerr, who shared in Jordan's last three championships in Chicago, also does not shy from the comparison. "Dwyane's athleticism is stunning," says Kerr, who has served as a television analyst on several Heat playoff broadcasts. "Maybe not as startling as watching Michael, but it's close. He puts such pressure on defenses, and what I remember most about Michael is no matter who was defending him, he always put so much pressure on the defense. That's what Dwyane does. He still gets wherever I think, has a little more of a point guard mentality than Michael. Michael was a scorer first, and then he'd create for other people." Van Gundy, however, is willing to go only so far. "I mean your career can fall well short of Michael Jordan's and it can still be a Hall of Fame career," he says. But... "I certainly see where the comparisons come from, and I do think mentalitywise, there's a lot of similarities. There's a confidence; there's a real great mental toughness, great intelligence." Photograph Sidebar Operation penetration When it comes to breaking down a defense, getting there (driving) is only a third of the fun. Top penetrators also must be adept at kicking out passes to teammates and finishing at the rim. An NBA scout and two assistant coaches helped Insider Sean Deveney rate the skills of the best penetrators left in the playoffs. In only his second season, Dwyane Wade combines skills of a point guard. More of what the experts say about Wade and his peers is on page 24. //
Some web sites make it all too easy to get medicine without getting appropriate medical advice.
One morning not long ago, Consumer Reports senior editor Tod Marks logged onto the Internet and did a simple search using the phrase "prescription drugs for sale." In seconds, the names of 150 sources appeared onscreen, nearly one-third of them accompanied by troubling boasts, such as, "No prescription? No doctor? No problem."
No kidding. In a follow-up investigation to "Relief for the Rx Blues" (October 1999), we found that despite claims of increased scrutiny by government regulators and medical and pharmacy-industry trade groups, suspect web sites that sell prescription drugs are flourishing. Ordering medications online without benefit of a proper diagnosis remains about as easy as clicking your way through cyberspace for books or clothes. Unfortunately, an ill-prescribed drug can carry far more serious consequences than a bad ending or a bad fit.
Without visiting or speaking to a doctor, Marks was able to buy seven different prescription drugs -- to help him lose aging, depression, seasonal allergies, and bacterial infection. Except for the antihistamine, which might have helped his hay fever, Marks, a healthy 44-year-old nonsmoker, had no business taking those medications.
Sites like those Marks visited are estimated to number in the hundreds, and they're only likely to multiply. Jupiter Communications, which tracks Internet businesses, projects that the annual sale of prescription drugs online will rise from about $23 million to nearly $1 billion over the next few years. Many of those sites will be legitimate, of course, but others will be established by companies looking to make a fast buck off consumers intent on treating themselves. Clearly, there's a demand for these pharmacies, termed "rogue" by government regulators and lawmakers. Just as clearly, there shouldn't be. According to the American Medical Association, the Federation of State Medical Boards, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Department of Justice, among many other sources, they're unethical ROGUE FROM RIGHT
Long before the Internet existed, Congress and state legislators enacted safeguards to protect patients from unsafe and counterfeit drugs, and from unethical doctors and pharmacists. Before receiving medicine for the first time, a patient is generally interviewed and examined by a licensed doctor, who issues a prescription for an FDA-approved drug. The prescription is then filled by a registered pharmacist working in a licensed pharmacy that meets state standards.
Legitimate online pharmacies such as CVS.com, an adjunct to the drugstore chain, as well as properly licensed Internet-only drugstores such as PlanetRx.com and drugstore.com, follow those procedures. They require confirmation from your doctor for any drug you request and let you e-mail or phone questions to a pharmacist. To open an account, you submit credit-card and insurance information. The pharmacy openly lists facts about its licensing.
Although rogue sites can look as sophisticated as legitimate ones, they don't require a similar chain of responsibility. They work in one of two ways.
Sites based in the doctor. It costs as much as $85 and typically consists of answering a questionnaire covering your medical history. If you pass muster with the doctor, he or she then issues a prescription to whatever pharmacist the web site uses. You see no person; you receive no paper, only an e-mail confirming your order. As part of the consultation, you promise to tell the truth, use the drug properly, and free everyone connected with the site from liability if complications arise. Kansas Assistant Attorney General Fran Brunner described that last agreement as an "unconscionable" ploy to discourage consumers from filing suit or complaining.
Rogue sites based overseas can be even more lax. They usually let people order without answering any questions. Customers just type in the name and quantity of the desired drug, click "order," and submit their credit-card information and address.
That process is illegal, says the FDA, for a few reasons. First, it's illegal to receive any prescription drug from overseas carry into the U.S. small quantities of prescription drugs they've bought abroad for personal use.) Second, the prescribing foreign doctors aren't licensed in the U.S. Third, drugs made in other countries may not have been approved by the FDA. Foreign sites often sell drugs that are available over the counter overseas but only by prescription in the U.S. -- but that's illegal, too.
When rogue sites first surfaced, they typically peddled remedies to help people lose weight, grow hair, or improve sexual performance -- in other words, to deal with conditions that patients might be reluctant to discuss with their doctor. People tended to see such "vanity" or "lifestyle" drugs (most notably Viagra) as more frivolous than others. They're not, of course. Moreover, some conditions allayed by such drugs have underlying causes that are far from obvious. Impotence, for instance, can be caused by a pituitary tumor, diagnosed only through a physical exam and follow-up tests. (Pfizer on the basis of an online questionnaire.)
These days, the sites sell almost everything from Allegra to Zyban, including often-overprescribed antibiotics. Details on our own shopping expedition are in "Why It Pays to Play by the Rules," on the facing page. What we couldn't buy -- narcotics, stimulants, depressants, and anabolic steroids -- are controlled substances regulated by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. DEA officials scrutinize prescriptions for those often-abused drugs to track down and prosecute people who sell or buy them illegally. HERE'S THE HARM
Whichever drugs are offered, one tip-off for a questionable site is a pitch saying you'll need no doctors, no appointments, no waiting rooms. To Dr. James Winn, executive vice president of the Federation of State Medical Boards, those are fighting words. "It's a dangerous situation for the American people," says Winn.
Here's why:
Insufficient medical review. The questionnaires we answered ranged from superficial one-page queries to longer forms Often, though, even the better questionnaires missed something a personal physician would have been likely to catch, says Dr. Marvin M. Lipman, Consumer Reports' chief medical adviser, who has practiced medicine for 40 years.
If you tell the whole truth and your answers raise a red flag -- say you have high blood pressure -- sites are likely to spit out the questionnaire and reject your request. That's because the web sites are typically programmed to note undesirable or suspicious answers and to turn down anyone who fails to meet certain criteria.
However, as we learned, the system isn't foolproof. For one thing, sometimes sites don't reject a problematic request. When Marks tried to buy Zyban, prescribed for smokers who want to quit, Confidential Rx ignored his notation that he didn't smoke. He got the Zyban.
He also got somatropin (Saizen), an injectable human growth hormone usually prescribed for children with growth deficiency but sometimes abused by others. At first, in the past year, GHMedical.com rejected his order. When he falsely said he had had a physical yet told the truth about his height, the site saw no problem in sending the drug to Marks, a slightly short but by no means stunted middle-aged man.
For another thing, people who want a drug are likely to stretch the truth. And when they do that, a lot can go wrong. A 90-pound anorexic who claims to weigh 290 can get a diet drug, a 12-year-old kid can get a muscle-building drug. The truth is, there's little to stop anyone, through ignorance of their own health or through mischief, from buying almost any prescription drug. (For his part, Marks usually told the truth. He fibbed about that physical exam and about his weight, to get the diet drug Meridia.)
Finally, the people doing the prescribing might be outright frauds. Last summer, a Department of Justice spokesman told us, a federal jury in Alabama indicted's Clinic on a series of charges, including writing phony prescriptions and charging consumers for medical consultations that they allege never occurred. The case has yet to go to trial.
All of this reinforces the need for doctors to see that people are who they say they are and to ascertain, through an exam, whether patients have a condition that could make taking certain medications a fatal error. Incomplete instructions. When you fill a prescription at a legitimate venue, you receive a pharmacist's printout of instructions and warnings. Only two of the rogue pharmacies from which we ordered sent such a printout. Once, the information was not even correct: Zyban, the antismoking drug, came with instructions for taking Viagra. The rest left us to learn about dosage and side effects from the box itself and from the manufacturer's fine-print information sheet that comes with any drug. Questionable quality. We ordered four drugs -- Fosamax, Zithromax, Prozac, and Renova (tretinoin, an antiaging cream) -- from in an unmarked brown envelope with a return post office box labeled Bangkok, Thailand. The boxes containing the medicines were somewhat squashed and looked as if they'd already been opened. Nowhere was there any indication of the patient's name. Moreover, government officials warn that the drugs sold by rogue foreign sites could be contaminated, counterfeit, or outdated, or could have been stored improperly. Loss of privacy. Some sites have no stated policy about privacy, security, or confidentiality: Customers can't tell what happens to the medical and credit-card data they provide. Even sites that promise to keep such information private may not, says the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Last summer, the agency settled various claims against a group of pharmacies doing business under several web addresses including worldwidemedicine.com and focusmedical.com. The sites claimed that sensitive information could be viewed only by authorized people because it was encrypted. It wasn't. Moreover, according to the FTC, the site operators planned to provide customers' credit-card try to bill those customers for work needed to make the web sites Y2K compliant. Without admitting wrongdoing, the sites agreed to disclose more information about their operations and about the doctors who prescribe.
Reporter Marks wondered about the privacy of his orders after receiving unsolicited e-mails promoting hard-core sex sites.
Lack of accountability. Because they're not licensed to dispense drugs or because they do so in a way that violates the law, operators of rogue sites don't usually divulge critical information about their operation: their owners' names; their location; and the names, qualifications, and specialties of their consulting doctors. In fact, you'd be hard pressed to contact a prescribing doctor. When Marks called the phone number on his bottle of Meridia and asked to speak to the doctor named on the bottle, his request was denied. PAYING THE PRICE
Patients may accept the risk of ordering from a rogue site because they think they're getting a bargain, but our snapshot price comparison showed that ordered (and not accounting for any consultation fee or visit to a doctor), we often found little difference in price between good sites and bad. Somatropin actually cost far more at one rogue site than at a mainstream site. Moreover, you may have to pay that consultation fee each time you order a drug. Foreign sites tend to offer rock-bottom prices, but as we've seen, they have many other problems. PAYING THE PENALTY
A wealth of federal and state agencies have control over at least a piece of the Internet pharmacy business. So far, there have been only a handful of criminal prosecutions or disciplinary actions, but more than 50 cases involving rogue sites are under investigation, says Tom McGinnis, the FDA's director of pharmacy affairs. The FDA has stepped up enforcement recently -- by sending cyber warning letters, for instance. In addition, several states have taken or are contemplating action against illegitimate online sellers. And 15 states have taken action against physicians prescribing over the Internet from abroad. Twenty drug-selling sites in Thailand alone were closed last year. During the same time, U.S. officials seized more than 1 million pills smuggled from that country into New York's John F. Kennedy Airport. However, policing foreign sites is especially difficult, McGinnis says, because the U.S. lacks jurisdiction abroad and because as soon as one site is shut down, another opens. What's more, the drugs are packed in everything from plain brown wrappers to hollowed-out books, and McGinnis concedes that such packages routinely avoid detection.
Stopping companies that sell drugs illegally could become easier under the Internet Prescription Drug Consumer Protection Act of 2000, introduced by a bipartisan group of congressional lawmakers last October. The act would make Internet sellers disclose their address, their telephone number, and the states in which they're licensed, plus the name, specialties, and licensing information of anyone giving medical consultations. The bill, now in committee, is likely to resurface this term.
The act would also let injunctions against rogue sites, effectively putting them out of business across the country. (Under existing law, an attorney general can stop a web site operator from selling drugs in his or her state only.) Further, the act would let the Department of Justice keep foreign-based sellers from collecting payments from U.S. customers by freezing credit-card orders.
Any legislation that would increase accountability and oversight would be welcome. However, rogue sites won't go away without a curb on two enablers in the process: the doctors who review questionnaires and the customers. Doctors who participate can face criminal prosecution for prescribing across state lines without an appropriate license. They can also have their medical license suspended or revoked because writing prescriptions to unseen patients falls far below the acceptable standard of patient care.
Why would doctors take such risks?
According to Carmen Catizone, executive director of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP), the motivation is often money. Doctors and other health-care practitioners, Catizone says, as $5,000 per month to review patient questionnaires. According to Kansas Assistant Attorney General Brunner, an Ohio doctor earned $41,000 in five months by writing prescriptions for rogue web sites.
Individual consumers who order drugs from rogue sites are unlikely to be punished, unless a controlled substance is involved or they're receiving large amounts of prescription drugs from overseas.
YOU SAY TOMATO The antihistamine called Claritin in the U.S. is Claratyne in New Zealand. Whatever their spelling, drugs made and sold abroad have generally not been approved by the FDA for sale in the U.S. That didn't stop foreign companies from mailing them to our reporter. RECOMMENDATIONS
Ordering online is convenient for people who are pressed for time or homebound. But with any medical condition, it's essential to obtain a proper diagnosis from a doctor who has examined you, taken a complete medical history, discussed alternative treatments, and made a commitment to follow up on your care. Here's how to reap the convenience of ordering drugs online while ensuring sites bearing the Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Sites (VIPPS) seal. It's designed to help consumers identify sites that are licensed and in good standing with regulatory agencies. The VIPPS program is sponsored by NABP, which is an umbrella group for the state pharmacy boards. across the country. To date, 15 sites representing 12,000 pharmacies (including traditional brick-and-mortar drugstores run by many big chains) are certified. New sites are continually being certified, so check with the NABP at www.nabp.net for the latest information. Do business only with a site that has access to a registered pharmacist who will answer questions. Do business only with a site that provides detailed information about itself, including a U.S. address and a phone number to contact if there's a problem. Beware of sites that tout a "new cure" for a serious disorder or "amazing" results. Read the fine print on the web page. Sites under investigation list the names of states in which they're barred from selling. If you the FDA by sending an e-mail to **25;531;TOOLONG. If you've had a life-threatening reaction to a drug bought on line, call 301 443-1240. To report a milder reaction, call 888 463-6332. Troubled orders
If you order from a site that doesn't require a prescription from your doctor, problems can crop up anytime during the process.
TOP: The preview. GHMedical.com offered somatropin, an injectable human growth hormone often prescribed for children deficient in that hormone. What's the muscled arm doing in the page's upper right corner? It may be tempting people who shouldn't be buying the drug. Somatropin has been abused by those looking to build muscle mass (it's also known as a "fountain of youth" drug).
CENTER: The consultation form. Our reporter admitted he doesn't smoke, but Confidential Rx saw no problem in sending him Zyban, an antismoking drug.
BOTTOM: The result. Boxes of Fosamax and Zithromax our reporter ordered from abroad arrived squashed doctors get from drug companies. Why it pays to play by the rules
Given the time it takes to see a doctor and the high cost of medicine, it's easy to see why some people would think about cutting corners. However, buying prescription drugs via unlicensed online pharmacies is like playing Russian roulette. Taking those drugs without the proper oversight can be riskier still. The table below lists some of the drugs we bought from suspicious web sites, possible serious side effects associated with those products, and comments about our ordering experience. TABLE
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
PHOTO (COLOR)
Viewpoint:
As part of his health care plan, President Clinton has proposed price controls on health insurance premiums and "global budgets" that try to limit how much people can spend on health care each year. Although the details of his plan are still sketchy, the concept is not new.
The Canadian health system already imposes limits on premiums and budget spending. Under Canada's government-funded health system, established nationwide in 1971, patients shoulder little or none of the cost of their care. This predictably has escalated demands for services and thus prompted a steady tightening of government regulations to control costs. The results: physician fees are rigidly controlled and the introduction of new technology and certain services are limited. (See "Should We Adopt Canada's Health Care System?" CR, May 1990.) To see how the Clinton plan might affect patients, therefore, it is instructive to look at what global budgets and price controls have meant for Canada.
In general, Canadians have little trouble seeing a general-practice or family-practice physician. But attempts to control health care spending by limiting expensive medical technology. Within hospitals, physicians work under severely limited budgets.
Lack of Access to Technology
The latest available statistics comparing access to modern medical technology in the United States and Canada, based on information in Medical Economics magazine, reveal the following: On a per capita basis, the United States has 10 times as many magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) units as Canada. The United States has three times as many computerized axial tomagraphy (CAT) scanners per person. The United States also has about three times as many lithotripsy units, which destroy kidney stones and gall stones with sound waves, per person. And, per capita, the United States has about three times as many open-heart surgery units and eleven times as many cardiac catheterization units (for the treatment of heart disease).
Rationing Scarce Technology. Seattle, Washington (population 490,000) has more CAT scanners (used, for example, to detect brain tumors) than the. There are more MRI scanners in Washington State (population 4.6 million) than in all of Canada (population 26 million). While critics of the U.S. health care system claim the United States has too much technology, all the evidence suggests that Canada has too little-as a result of the conscious decisions of government officials.
Delaying New Technology. Some argue that Canada and other countries with global budgets delay the purchase of expensive technology in order to see if it works and is cost-effective. If true, the downside of this approach is that patients are denied access to potentially lifesaving treatment while government bureaucracies evaluate it. -During the 1970s, for example, lifesaving innovations were made in kidney dialysis, CAT scanning, and pacemaker technology. Yet: The rate of pacemaker implantations in the United States during the mid-1970s was almost 20 times that of Canada. CAT scanners were more than three times as available in the United States as Canada. The treatment rate of kidney patients was more than 60% greater in the no new medical technology and spends very little on research and development. By contrast, research and development spending in the United States result in innovations that benefit the United States, Canada, and the rest of the world.
Rationing by Waiting
A recent 12,000-person survey by Canada's official statistical agency led to an estimate that 1,379,000 people (out of a total population of 26 million) are waiting for some medical service, ranging from a visit to their general practitioner to nursing home admission. Of those, more than 177,000 people are waiting for surgical procedures. These people must endure lengthy waits before meeting with a specialists and even longer waits before obtaining needed surgery.
The Length of Waiting. Because the demand for health care has proved insatiable, and because Canadian provincial governments severely limit hospital budgets: The average wait to see an eye specialist in Prince Edward Island is six months-and it takes another six months on the aver to be treated. On the average, it takes almost seven weeks to to be treated. To see an ear, nose, and throat specialist takes a little more than two weeks in Newfoundland-but it takes another six months to be treated.
Note that these are averages for entire provinces. The wait for any particular patient can be much longer. For example, patients in British Columbia wait up to a year for routine procedures such as cholecystectomies, prostatectomies, hip replacements, and surgery for hemorrhoids and varicose veins. In Ontario, patients wait up to six months for a CAT scan, up to a year for eye surgery and orthopedic surgery, up to a year and four months for an MRI scan and up to two years for lithotripsy treatment.
On the average, it takes about five weeks to see a specialist in all 10 Canadian provinces. However, the average wait varies widely from province to province. More-over, as shown in the table below, the waiting time for actual treatment varies even more.
More people in Canada die of cardiovascular disease for "conventional illness" and for high-cost procedures, such as cardiac bypass surgery are separate. The result is lengthy waiting lists for such surgery, often as long as a year or more. Political pressures have prompted shortterm solutions: After a report that Newfoundland's waiting list was a year long, the hospital performing open heart surgery received a special temporary grant to deal with the waiting list. After a public outcry over the six-month waiting list, British Columbia contracted with Washington state hospitals to perform some 200 cardiac operations in 1989.
It is estimated that 5% of heart patients inquire about surgery outside Canada and 1.5% actually have their heart surgery performed outside the country.

Effects on Patient's Health. The average amount of time patients wait for surgery of all kinds appears to be about the same as in 1967, the year before Canada began implementing national health insurance. However, the makeup of the waiting list is different. More people are waiting, and those waiting are sicker. Recently waiting describe themselves as "in pain." Others are risking their lives. In British Columbia, for example: Whereas only 7% of the patients waiting in 1967 were classified as urgent, 24% were classified as urgent in 1988. Whereas 0.6% of the population was on the waiting list in 1967, 1.1%-almost double the fraction of the population-was on the waiting list in 1992.
On the surface, the number of people waiting may seem small relative to the total population. However, considering that only 16% of the population enters a hospital each year in developed countries and that only about 4% require most of the serious (and expensive) procedures, these numbers are quite high. They imply that one out of every four British Columbians needing expensive medical technology is unable to get it promptly.
How Global Budgets Cause Rationing. The evidence shows that the severity of rationing is directly related to the stinginess of a province's global budget. Specifically, there is a close correlation between waiting times and the For example: Provinces that spend $1,500 or more per capita on health care have shorter waiting times. Ontario, the province with the shortest waiting times of all, spent $313.70 per capita more on health care than any other province in 1991, the latest year for which data are available.
Americans Cut in Line. The Canadian government has proclaimed health care to be a basic human "right." Yet the right is far from guaranteed. Not only do Canadians have no enforceable right to any particular medical service, they don't even have a right to a place in line when health care is rationed. The 100th person waiting for heart surgery is not "entitled" to the one hundredth surgery, for example. Other patients jump the queue for any number of reasons. Among the patients who jump the queue are Americans who pay out-of-pocket for care. U.S. patients add to hospital revenues, so hospital administrators value them. Since Canadians can not legally pay for care at a national health insurance. In this sense, Americans have a greater right to health care in Canada than do Canadians.
Global Budgets Favor Rich and Powerful. Most people in Canada and other countries that ration health care through global budgets believe that the wealthy, the powerful, and the sophisticated move to the head of the rationing lines. Because government officials have little interest in verifying these facts, few formal studies exist. However, the evidence that does exist supports the charge. A recent analysis of surgical waiting lists in British Columbia concluded that "nearly 80% of queue jumping is not on the basis of emergency but on the basis of physician/surgeon preferences, requests from senior Ministry of Health officials, and sometimes from members of the legislature." Members of Parliament and 4,364 high-ranking federal bureaucrats can avoid waiting lists because they have access to the National Defense Medical Center. In 1990, the Canadian Auditor General reported that 61% of the center's inpatient days were for nonmilitary patients.
Even Animals Get Faster Service. In queue in some provinces. Ordinary people, other than those designated as emergencies, can not get a CAT scan quickly at any price because they are not allowed to pay for it. However, in an 18-month period, York Central Hospital in a Toronto Suburb did more that 70 CAT scans on animals suspected of having such problems as tumors. The tests were done at night and the charge was $300 each.
As the waiting lines grow for virtually every type of treatment in every Canadian province, America serves as Canada's safety valve. In increasing numbers, Canadians cross the U.S. border to get care they can not get at home. In 1990, the Ontario Health Insurance Plan paid about $214 million to U.S. doctors and hospitalsup 45% from the previous year. (Because of large budgetary deficits, Ontario no longer covers residents who take advantage of U.S. health care services, except in special circumstances, such as for procedures not done in Canada.) This year, the Canada-America Health Care Corp., policy providing for access to care in the United States if they had to wait 45 days or longer for care in Canada.
Deteriorating Quality of Care Americans have been told that the quality of care in Canada has not suffered because of Canada's system of global budgets and health care rationing. Yet there are increasing reports by doctors and the news media of patient deaths and near-deaths, precisely because the government limits technology and causes health care rationing. Here is one doctor's report of what conditions are like in Quebec:
"In my academic practice at a teaching neurologic hospital in Montreal, the wait for the treatment of' minor' medical problems (e.g. carpal tunnel syndrome) could be half a year or longer. What I considered essential services were unavailable. I recall losing an argument with the radiologist on call over whether a patient with a new stroke should have a CT scan at 5:05 p.m.; he judged that the situation was not an emergency serious enough to warrant performing the procedure after global budgets often point to the lower level of health care spending in other countries as "proof" of efficient management. Nothing could be further from the truth. By and large, countries that have slowed the growth of health care spending have done so by denying services, not by using resources efficiently.
How much does it cost a hospital to perform an appendectomy? Outside the United States, it is doubtful that any public hospital knows. Nor do government-run hospitals typically keep records that would allow anyone else to find out. In organizational skills and managerial efficiency, Canadian hospitals are far behind hospitals run by Hospital Corporation of America, Humana, or American Medical International. In fact, Canadian hospitals in several provinces have called in management groups from the United States either to retrieve them from financial difficulty or to improve their financial performance generally.
While 177,000 wait for surgery in Canada, at any point in time one in five hospital beds is empty. Moreover, about 25% of all acute-care beds the "hotel" services of the hospital, which are less draining to limited hospital budgets.
The U.S. health care system is often criticized as wasteful because many procedures are "unnecessary." One source of evidence for unnecessary medical care is a series of studies that show wide variations in the rate of treatment among different U.S. communities, with no apparent justification. One might suppose that in countries where health care is rationed and many medical needs are unmet, doctors would tend to provide only necessary care. That is not the case. Treatment rates in Canada also vary considerably. For example: There is a four-to-one difference among Canadian counties in the rate of cesarean sections. There is a four-to-one difference in rates of tonsillectomy and hysterectomy and a two-to-one difference in the rates of mastectomy, prostatectomy, and cholecystectomy.
The characteristics described in this article are not accidental by-products of global budgets and price controls. They are the natural and inevitable consequences of government's responding to increases in demand for health administration's health care proposal has ostensibly rejected a Canadian version of nationalized health care, it has adopted the key deficiency of the Canadian system. Capping the supply of care through budget and premium limitations, as in the Canadian system, will lead to lower costs only to the extent that they lead to shortages of technology, waiting for treatment, and reduced response to the health care needs of Americans.
GRAPHS (2): Waiting Times in Canada (JOANN MIYAKE AND MICHAEL WALKER, "WAITING YOUR TURN: HOSPITAL WAITING LISTS IN CANADA, THIRD EDITION," FRASER FORUM, MAY 1993)
By Michael Walker and John C. Goodman

Mr. Walker is executive director of The Fraser Institute, a Vancouver, Canada-based organization specializing in health care issues
Mr. Goodman is president of the National Center for Policy Analysis (NCPA) in Dallas.
COST CONTROL FAILURE
Despite global budgets, rationing by waiting and other strategies, Canada has not been any more successful in controlling costs than has spent $2,868 per person on health care, whereas Canada spent only $1,915 (in U.S. dollars). Some people argue that if the United States adopted Canada's health care system, it could cut health care spending by 25%. However, over the 20 years from 1967 to 1987, real increases in health me spending per capita were virtually the same in both countries. (The increase as 4.38% in the United States, 4.58% in Canada.)
Not only has Canada been no more successful than the United States in controlling increases in spending but, until recently, it has been less successful. Recent financial successes in Canada have been achieved largely by denying and delaying care.
Comparing United States and Canadian health care spending presents problems because of differences in how money is spent and how it is tabulated. In order to avoid these problems, one study measured international health care spending excluding costs of administration, hospital construction, and research and development. Using this more precise measure, the study found health care than Canada-but the difference is smaller (10.2% vs. 8.4%.) During the 1980s, the real growth rate for health care spending was 85% higher in Canada than in the United States. In per capita terms, Canadian costs had a real growth rate of 163% of the U.S. rate.
BAREFOOT AS SHE DESCENDS THE winding marble staircase in her elegant, 15-room mansion in exclusive Grosse Pointe, Mich., pop diva Anita Baker takes little notice of the trappings of success around her. Padding through the ballroom-size living room, past the French doors with their spectacular view of Lake St. Clair, the seven-time Grammy winner heads for the sunroom, where one of her happiest creations gurgles in a kiddie swing. "There he is," Baker coos over her 5-month-old son, Edward. "Here's my big boy!" Little wonder that Baker dotes on baby "Eddie Bear" and his 20-month-old brother, "Little Walter." Both boys were born during a three-year hiatus that began in 1991, when the exhausted and stress-plagued Baker abruptly canceled the remainder of a concert tour and afterward suffered her second miscarriage. Now that she's fully recovered and ready to resume her career, Baker, 36, is loath to let the boys out of her sight. Some of the recording sessions for her new hit album of sumptuous romantic ballads, Rhythm were held in a studio built close enough to the home she shares with her husband of nearly six years, Walter Bridgforth, 37, a real estate developer, for the singer to bicycle to work. And when Baker begins a yearlong world tour in December, the boys, two nannies and Bridgforth will go along for the ride. The company will be good for Baker, who admits to feeling apprehensive about going back on the road. "She feels an enormous relief now that she has this family," says Baker's longtime manager Sherwin Bash. "It wasn't something that happened very easily." For Baker, whose mother abandoned her at age 2 and who never knew her father, family ties are hard won. Cared for by her maternal grandparents and, following their death when she was 13, raised in Detroit by members of her Baptist church congregation, Baker saw her mother only sporadically during her teen years. Finding solace singing in the church choir, she became lead vocalist 8, in the late 1970s. After going solo in 1980, she released her first album, The Songstress, in 1983. Three years later her Grammy-winning breakthrough Rapture sold 5 million copies and established Baker as one of R &B's; premier vocalists. In the studio or on the road almost continually afterward, the 5' 1" singer seldom stopped to catch her breath. "I'd come home long enough to pick up one bag and drop another," she remembers. In January 1989, when she learned she was pregnant, Baker jubilantly announced the news to relatives and friends. "The older women in the family said," Just wait. Don't tell anybody. "They understood that you don't always make it through that first trimester. But I was like, 'Oh, please,'" she says. A month later, she says sadly, "I went to the doctor's office for my checkup, and they couldn't find the baby's time to recover by her grueling schedule, she found that by January 1991, when she arrived in Chicago for a concert date, both her nerves and her voice were shot. Walking into her hotel suite, "I just started crying," she says. "I just lost it, totally." At Bridgforth's urging, Baker canceled the rest of the tour. After several months she became pregnant again, only to lose the baby in a devastating second-trimester miscarriage. When doctors induced labor, Baker says, "I had to deliver what I knew was going to be a stillborn baby in the same hospital ward with women who were delivering healthy babies. People don't understand how painful miscarriage can be." Baker admits that at first she could not share her grief, even with her husband. "I would cry alone because I didn't want to upset him. Unbeknownst to me, he was grieving alone because he didn't want to upset me. Then one day we I just said, "'I need you.'" With Bridgforth offering support -- "I tried to make sure she knew she wasn't alone," he says -- Baker began to recover, and the couple tried once more to conceive. "Every few months I would say, 'Walter, I'm pregnant.' But we'd go to the doctor, and I'd have to tell Walter, 'No, I'm just a little late.'" Finally, in the summer of 1992, after a home pregnancy test read positive, Baker and Bridgforth consulted a specialist in problem pregnancies who performed a cerclage, a procedure that secures the fetus by stitching the cervix. Just seven months after Walter was born, in January 1993, Baker learned she was pregnant again. Thanks to a second cerclage last year, she was able to bear Edward Carlton -- in honor of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Dearborn, where she believes he was conceived -- last May. Baker,, went back to work soon after he was born. The babies' nannies, though, are sent home at 5 p.m. sharp. "We don't want our kids calling the nanny Mommy," says Bridgforth, who handles late bottle feedings so his wife can rest after long days in rehearsal. "In the evening, that's the quality time we spend together. We try to live our lives normally." Which is not to say life will be boring for the newest members of the family. Pleased that Rhythm's reviews have been positive, Baker is eager to see one would-be critic's reaction to her live show when she takes the family on tour in December. "I can't wait to have Little Walter standing in the wings watching me do my thing," she says. "He's going to freak."

This article is excerpted, with permission, from How to Insure Your Home, by Merritt Publishing. Part of the "How to Insure..." series by the Merritt editors, insurance specialists. Copies of the book, which includes information on how home insurance works and how to avoid claims problems, is available for $12.95 (plus shipping and handling) from the publisher (800) 638-7597.
When Hurricane Andrew slammed into the Florida coast in August 1992, Brian Pariser's home was one of more than 135,000 damaged or destroyed. Pariser believed his home was fully covered -- until a contractor told him it would cost $165,874 to rebuild. That was $62,445 more than his insurance policy would pay.
"What angered me most," Pariser told a local newspaper, "is that I had asked my agent for the best possible coverage."
In 1981, he'd bought a homeowner's policy that had been an HO-3 policy (see box, page 29). But, in the years since, his insurance company had these policies were available to many homeowners at lower premiums than standard HO-3 insurance.
Pariser, and other homeowners who claimed they only learned about the better coverage after Hurricane Andrew, complained bitterly that guaranteed replacement-cost policies were offered as a matter of course to new policy owners -- but long-term customers were left uninformed.
In fact, a group of them filed suit against several large homeowner's insurance companies, arguing that the companies had been negligent in not telling their customers about better coverage.
Of course, they could have asked their agents or insurance companies if there were newer, broader policies available.
This article offers some basic buying guidelines and tips that smart insurance consumers can follow to maintain cost-effective coverage on their homes.
Policy Terms and Conditions. It's no brilliant conclusion to say that insurance consumers -- like consumers of anything -- should compare the various products they're considering buying. The problem with insurance is that people don't always know where to look.
When considering the the replacement value of your home -- and how insurance companies calculate this figure.
You should have enough insurance to cover the cost of rebuilding your home. This may be different from the market value or assessed value; that's why the most popular policies currently are the ones that guarantee replacement value. They eliminate the homeowner's risk of being caught short.
Some homeowners get into automatic insurance packages that limit homeowner's coverage to the amount they owe on their mortgages. If you have that kind of insurance -- and especially if you've paid off a good part of your loan -- take some time to review its coverage. It could mean that if something bad happens, your mortgage company will be paid off, but you'll be left with a vacant lot where your house used to be.
Always buy insurance for at least 80% of your home's replacement value. If you buy less, you forfeit the right to collect the full replacement value of the insured property, even to three price factors, which put limits on the amount of recovery. It is important to consider these factors when purchasing your policy: the loss payment shall not exceed the limit of insurance on the building, the loss payments shall not cover any more than the cost of similar construction, and in no event shall the loss payment exceed the actual cost of repair.
You can raise or lower the other coverages a standard homeowner's policy offers to meet your particular needs.
Most policies cover personal property for 50% of the insured value of the house. So, if your house is covered for $100,000, the insurance company will pay up to $50,000 for loss or damage of its contents. For a higher premium, you can increase that coverage to 75%.
Most policies do not cover damage to-or loss of -- cars, aircraft, or pets. For some items, there are limits to coverage for theft. Those vary somewhat from company to company, but the following limits are typical on firearms; $2,500 for business property kept at home; $1,000 to $2,000 on jewelry, watches, and furs; $1,000 on securities, deeds, manuscripts, and other valuable papers; $1,000 on boats; and $200 on coin collections, gold, silver, and currency.
These limits apply to each category of item, not each item. You can buy additional insurance to raise the limits on any of these categories or to protect specific valuables.
Inflation-guard clauses written into policies ostensibly protect the homeowner against rising construction costs, yet many storm and fire victims find that these clauses fail to keep pace with the market.
A caveat: Construction prices can jump even higher after a major disaster -- like a hurricane or earthquake -- when building materials and labor are in short supply.
Owners of older homes often fare the worst with inflation-guard policies -- and even **27;560;TOOLONG policies. These adjustment mechanisms don't usually cover the expense of upgrading older homes to meet current building codes.
An estimated's Oakland Hills fire were code-deficient. Most of these people had to battle their insurance companies for what they considered standard coverage -- and bring their rebuilt houses up to code.
If you own a house that's more than 20 years old, you may need to buy additional coverage that assures any rebuilding will bring the house into compliance with current codes and zoning laws.
Watch The Price Tag. Premiums are based on property value, type of construction, location, etc. When comparison shopping, keep in mind that there are many ways to reduce the amount of premium that you pay for your homeowner's insurance policy.
Before purchasing your home and the insurance for it, take into account the types of construction and your location. In California, for example, the cost for wood-frame construction ranges from $1.50 to $3.00 per $1,000 of coverage, depending on location. Lower rates apply in the central part of the state; higher rates in the coastal counties and those along fault areas., fires, or natural disasters -- can expect to pay more than residents of low-loss areas.
Buying a combination of two or more types of coverage, or "package policy," can help keep costs down. The Homeowner's Policy Program provides liability automatically in addition to the property coverages. By combining property and liability coverages, the insurance company is able to reduce processing costs, determine losses more accurately, and pass these savings on to the consumer in the form of lower premiums.
For most homeowner's forms, a principal amount of insurance is selected for the dwelling. Reasonable amounts of coverage are then automatically provided for other coverages based on a percentage of the amount provided for the dwelling.
These reasonable amounts are not the maximum amounts available; they are simply limited amounts of coverage that satisfy the average needs of most homeowners. If a particular person has a greater exposure, greater amounts of insurance may be purchased.
For example: You have $10,000 of coverage for other dwelling. If your four-car detached garage has a replacement cost of $30,000, you may need to purchase more "other structures" coverage -- in which case, an additional premium will be charged.
Under HO-4 and HO-6, the principal amount of insurance is selected for personal property -- and a reasonable amount of coverage is automatically included for other coverages, based on a percentage of this amount.
A few other tactics that can help keep premiums down: Raise Your Deductible. The higher your deductible, the lower your premium. If you raise the deductible from $250 to $500, you may be able to trim more than 10% off your premium. Raise it to $1,000 and you could save more than 25%. Ask About Your Fire-Protection Class. The closer you are and the better the professionals are trained, the lower your premiums should be. The Insurance Services Office assigns every neighborhood in the United States a fire-protection class, based on the quality of fire protection and the distance of homes from a rating systems.) If your assigned class isn't right, you may be paying too much for your insurance. Look Into a FAIR Plan Policy, if you're having difficulty obtaining insurance in the standard market. FAIR plans were created to make basic property insurance available to consumers in areas where coverage is difficult to obtain or has become otherwise unavailable. The FAIR plan writes coverage in designated urban areas and hazardous brush areas. The federal government provides riot reinsurance for insurers that participate in a HUD-approved FAIR plan.
Any person having an insurable interest in property in an officially designated area who has been unable to obtain coverage through normal channels is entitled to FAIR plan coverage.
Review Coverage Every Few Years. One of the most important things to consider regarding your homeowner's insurance is not to assume that everything has been taken care of -- or that it has been taken care of in the best way for your needs.
If you rely on your insurance company or agent to set your policy find yourself underinsured when you file a claim. This can be a serious problem. In extreme situations, you can deal with underinsurance by having your policy upgraded retroactively. But this kind of solution is rare -- and getting rarer, as insurance companies operate on ever-thinner reserves and profit margins.
The fact remains that, if you haven't reviewed your homeowner's policy in the past few years, your home may be underinsured. The house you insured for $115,000 five years ago could cost $150,000 to rebuild today. Any additions, renovations, or major purchases could also have boosted your coverage needs.
Also, if other assets you own have grown substantially, your personal liability limits should be adjusted to keep up with them.
The HO-3, or special homeowner's policy, protects your home against all perils except those specifically excluded by the contract. It typically costs 10% to 15% more than the HO-1 policy.
Many insurance companies also offer guaranteed replacement-cost policies, which go a step further full amount needed to replace your home and its contents, even if that exceeds the policy limit.
Despite its name, however, many companies set limits for this coverage, paying only up to 120% or 150% of the policy's face value. The limit for contents coverage is generally set at 75% of the home's replacement cost, as opposed to the standard 50% on other policies.
Some old homeowner's policies pose a particularly significant risk, called implied co-insurance. This comes from the standard provision in most homeowner's policies that the insurance company will not cover a portion of any loss greater than the proportion of the existing policy limit to the market value of the insured house.
For example: You have a house that would cost $200,000 to replace, but your policy has a $100,000 limit. Your insurer can maintain that you were purposefully taking on some of the risk of insurance -- in this case, 50% of the risk. Assume you have a $150,000 loss, including contents you were adequately insured, in this case, the insurer may say the coverage is half that, or $75,000.
Warranty Insurance. Keeping up to date with your homeowner's insurance needs is important because the insurance industry is changing constantly. And the advisory role that personal insurance agents used to play is disappearing. As a result, policy owners are left to battle insurance companies over coverage issues.
A recent illustration: With developers facing intense financial pressure in the current weak market, a growing number of new-home buyers demand insured warranty programs to pay for the cost of defective construction or unforeseen repairs to their new homes.
The policies usually cost several hundred dollars and cover major structural repairs for as many as 10 years and less severe problems for one or two years. But a series of lawsuits has raised concerns about whether owners of these policies have been getting their money's worth.
With growing frequency, particularly in cases where the home builder has gone out of business, the warranties insurance company over whether the coverage applies under the contract. Usually such disputes are heard by arbitrators.
In a 1991 case challenging the practices of home-warranty companies, a federal appeals court in Virginia required Denver-based Home Buyers Warranty, the nation's largest such company, to abide by an arbitrator's award of more than $200,000 to a policy owner. The company had sought to push the case into court.
The issue before the fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals centered on whether an arbitrator's award of $206,605 in damages to a homeowner in one such dispute was binding, or whether it could be appealed by the insurer through the courts. National Home Insurance had argued that either party had the option of appealing if dissatisfied by the arbitration award.
But in a 12-page opinion, the appeals court ruled that Home Buyers Warranty's contract language specifically requires binding arbitration.
This conclusion shouldn't have come as a surprise. In 1990, a Texas jury ordered Homeowner's Warranty Corp., the nation damages to a policy owner whose house was falling apart because of a crack in the foundation.
Homeowner's Warranty, which denied coverage, had assured the buyers that all homes insured under its program were inspected on a continuing basis during construction -- a point that was contested at trial. Of the total jury award, $325,000 was for punitive damages intended to deter future wrongdoing. The two sides agreed to settle the case out of court for an undisclosed amount.
Exclusions and Other Red Flags. An important point to remember when buying homeowner's insurance: All types of coverage pose certain exclusions. Some people overlook these exceptions when reading through their policies, later to find that their assets were not protected under their policies.
It is important to know when coverage does and does not apply. You should know the common restrictions of your policy before you purchase it.
Understand the concepts involved in rating procedures. Although there will be variations to contend with for different companies and different states, a basic understanding of the application of rules under the traditional rating procedures will make it easier for you to understand how rates are charged and adapt to future changes.
The age of a home is an important factor to insurance companies. Companies may charge up to 20% less to insure new homes than to insure older ones, which may be more susceptible to damage in storms and fires. Outdated building standards and old wiring can also make older homes riskier to insure. (See "What Do You Mean It's Not Covered?" CR, September 1995.)
Making Claims. The process of making a claim on your homeowner's insurance policy is referred to as the adjustment process. It is a negotiation, in which knowing your rights can be pivotal.
An insurance company has the right and the option to investigate and settle any lawsuit or claim against you. It also accepts an obligation to defend any lawsuit or claim -- but if it pays the limit of its liability to settle provide any further defense.
At the same time, it is also important to know the role you play in reporting a loss. Here are just a few effective ways to help ensure the best response to your claim: Give Immediate Notice. Promptly give notice to your insurance company or agent after a loss to covered property has occurred. Make an Inventory List of the Damaged Personal Property. Include all bills, receipts and related documents that justify the figures in the inventory. Notify the police as soon as possible after a loss by theft. Notify the credit card or fund transfer card company of loss or theft of a credit card or funds transfer card. Make an Attempt to Protect the Damaged Property from Further Damage. If repairs to the property are required, make the reasonable and necessary repairs as well as keep an accurate record of the repair expenses.
Read your policy and know the type of coverage you have. If you know the basics about your coverage, you're more likely some ways to double check your policy:
Verify the Adjuster's Estimate. Don't accept the settlement until you get a written bid from a licensed contractor to make sure the adjuster's estimate is realistic.
But, before you bring in outside experts, check their qualifications. Keep Records. Make copies of all information in connection with your claim. Hold onto everything the insurer gives you. You may also want to take notes of meetings and conversations with your agent, insurer, or claims adjuster. Don't Settle if the Offer's Unfair. If you can't reach an agreement, contact your agent or the insurer's claim-department manager before making a settlement.
The way you handle the steps of this process can determine whether you come out of the loss financially whole.
If you think you need to sue your insurance company because you are dissatisfied over a claim, you have to have complied with the policy provisions concerning the reporting of the loss, cooperating with the company in to compare and contrast any large expense that you may have, and homeowner's insurance is not an exception. Research will help you. find the coverage that suits you and obtain that coverage at affordable premiums.
It is important to compare not only insurance companies but the prices and coverage within each insurance company as well. With some shopping around and just a few adjustments, you will be able to find coverage in a package that suits you and your homeowner needs.
BASIC TYPES OF HOMEOWNER'S POLICIES
Most insurance companies offer six basic types of homeowner's-insurance policies. Every insurer may not offer all six, and the names and specific limits (named perils) of coverage may vary somewhat from company to company. In most states, these are the typical options: HO-1. This basic homeowner's policy protects your home against 11 named perils. This coverage is rarely enough, so many states are phasing out this type of policy. HO-2. This broad homeowner's policy covers your home against to most mobile-home owners. This type of policy generally costs 5% to 10% more than the HO-1 coverage. HO-3. This special homeowner's policy protects your home against all perils except those specifically excluded by the contract. It typically costs 10% to 15% more than the HO-1 policy.
Many companies also offer a guaranteed replacement cost policy, which goes one step further than a standard HO-3. It offers to pay the full amount needed to replace your home and its contents, even if that exceeds the policy limit. This type of policy, usually written as a form of HO-3, offers coverage similar to what was formerly called HO-5, a policy that has been phased out by most companies. HO-4. This renter's policy generally protects the possessions of tenants in a house or apartment against 17 named perils. It also provides liability coverage but doesn't protect the actual dwelling, which should be covered under the landlord's policy. Renters who don! t want to pay for liability protection can opt. This policy for co-op and condominium owners provides coverage for liability and personal property, much like HO-4. While insurance purchased by the co-op or condominium association covers much of the actual dwelling, individual owners who want coverage for improvements to their units must write them into an HO-6 policy. If you add a porch, for instance, you'll need an endorsement (an addition to your policy that expands its coverage). HO-8. Primarily for older homes, this policy covers the same perils as HO-1 but insures the house only for repair costs or its actual cash value, not its replacement cost. That's because the cost of rebuilding some homes with the materials and details of the original would make replacement cost coverage prohibitively expensive. An HO-8 policy pays to restore the damaged property, but not necessarily with the same kind or quality of materials as the original.
A desperate desire to be slender may have cost 22-year-old ballerina Heidi Guenther her life Photograph On a family trip to Flagstaff, Ariz., in 1992, Heidi frolicked in a field of flowers. // FINALLY THE YEARS OF PLIES and dreaming had paid off, and ballerina Heidi Guenther was determined to make the most of it. In May 1996, Guenther, 22, had been promoted from the Boston Ballet's apprentice company, where she had been perfecting her technique for two years, to the main corps de ballet. During Boston's grueling 52 performances of The Nutcracker last Christmas, she performed with remarkable zeal, dancing her own roles and often subbing for other corps members who were sick or injured. By the time the troupe closed its season in May with Cinderella, Guenther was looking noticeably thinner, but not alarmingly so-at least not by ballet standards. "Heidi was a lyrical dancer," says Boston Ballet artistic director Anna-Marie Holmes, "with a lovely sort of refined quality." Adds Boston soloist Kyra Strasberg: "She was a very" But at what price, many now ask, was that lightness purchased? For on June 30, while visiting her family in California during the Boston Ballet's summer break, Guenther was traveling with her mother and brother to Disneyland when she suddenly dropped dead from cardiac arrest. At the time of her death, the 5' 3" dancer weighed only 93 lbs. Friends and family soon believed that she had been dieting relentlessly to maintain what she thought was a suitable ballet body, which may have caused her heart to stop. Officials at the Boston Ballet denied that they had pushed Guenther too hard, arguing that though they had suggested she lose weight two years ago, they had recently urged her to eat more. But to the dancer's grieving mother, Patti Harrington, those protestations of innocence rang hollow. "The thinner she'd get, the more roles she'd get, the more compliments she'd get," says Harrington, a hotel concierge in San Francisco. "that." There is no question that the physical demands and psychological pressures of a top-flight company like the Boston Ballet are at least equal to those of professional sports. "Dancers do feel they could be replaced in a minute," says James Reardon, who danced with the Boston Ballet from 1976 to 1985 and is now the artistic director of his own small company in Cambridge, Mass. "There's always somebody in the wings." Photograph "She danced from the heart," says her father, Richard, of Heidi (this spring). Photograph "She was getting really thin," says the Boston Ballet's AnnaMarie Holmes. // Typically, Boston Ballet dancers spend an hour and a half a day in classes, working on technique, then another six hours in rehearsal, learning the steps for the ballets they will be performing during the season, with little more than a lunch hour and occasional five-minute breaks. All sessions are conducted under the watchful-and frequently hypercritical-eyes of the ballet, which invite an almost obsessive selfscrutiny. It is a fiercely competitive world in which physical perfection can often seem like the expected norm, rather than an unattainable ideal. "Your body is your instrument," says Reardon. "Dancers are constantly evaluating themselves. 'Do I look good? Do I look bad? How can I look better?'" Those, plainly, were the questions that haunted the days and nights of Heidi Guenther. Yet they hardly deterred her. Born in San Diego, the oldest of three children (her sister, Kirsten, is 20; her brother, Quinton, 15), Guenther began demonstrating her physical gifts almost from infancy By the time she was 8 months old, she was walking; not long after that, she could climb out of her crib. "She was always into things, climbing on things," says her father, Richard, who separated from Heidi's mother in 1988 and now teaches fifth grade in Los Osos, she began taking dance classes. "That's where she just blossomed," Richard says. "She loved dancing." Photograph "She loved the limelight," says mother Patti Har rington of Heidi (at age 11 "Put her onstage and she came alive." Photograph For their senior prom in'' 93, pals Kiersten Barile (left and Melissa Freund (center) posed with Heidi. Photograph Heidi (backstage in Boston recently) idolized dancers Gelsey Kirkland and Amanda McKerrow. // With her mother's strong encouragement and support, she set her sights on becoming a professional dancer. At age 11, she was accepted into a summer program at the Houston Ballet School. From 1987 to 1994, until securing her spot in Boston, she was a scholarship student with the San Francisco Ballet School. "She was so focused and driven to succeed," says Melanie Brown, a close friend and dancing partner in San Francisco. "All she wanted was to be a ballerina." hit puberty and her breasts began to develop. "She didn't like her boobs," says sister Kirsten, a student at the City College of San Francisco. "She didn't want them." That year, according to Patti, the San Francisco Ballet told Guenther to lose weight. "It was just devastating to hear," Patti says. "It was really hard. I felt for her because she felt so bad." Still, after Heidi lost a few pounds, she didn't seem obsessed about her diet. She and her friends would meet almost daily at a local drive-in and eat chicken strips dipped in ranch dressing, which Heidi would wash down with a chocolate shake. "She ate whatever she wanted to eat," says her friend Brown. "She was burning it all off anyway. Yet at that age... we saw a lot of eating disorders." The issue became more urgent several years later, in 1995, after she had company. "She had gotten just a little pudgy at that point," says Dierdre Myles, who directs the corps de ballet. Artistic director Holmes suggested to Guenther, who weighed about 115 pounds, that her chances of joining the main corps would improve if she dropped 5. When Guenther returned in August for the next season, Holmes says, she had lost the weight and "looked terrific." A year later she won her promotion to the Boston Ballet. How much the company is responsible for planting the seeds of what seemingly became an eating disorder is open to debate. In an interview with The Boston Globe after learning of Guenther's death, Holmes sounded like an advocate of slimmer-is-better. "You see a girl onstage, her butt going up and down, it's not attractive," she said. But Holmes insists, and a glance at her dancers confirms, that she is actually rather flexible when it comes to body types in her company. "I like diversity, company of sticks... but you have to have some aesthetic value. People are paying for tickets to see you." Moreover, the Boston Ballet did eventually encourage Guenther to maintain a healthy weight. As whispers began circulating in the company that she was looking thinner than usual, she was asked several times if she was eating properly. In her official evaluation last January, Guenther's dancing was praised, but she was cautioned about her diet. "Be careful not to get too thin," the evaluation read. "We are concerned and hope you are eating well." Guenther signed a statement acknowledging that she had been cautioned. "That's about all we can do," says Holmes, emphasizing that Guenther was an adult and a paid professional. In May, Guenther had a routine physical with a dance-company doctor and a nutritionist, who noted no serious problems. Indeed, her weight was hardly unusual for a young dancer. "She was thin," says Holmes. Photograph "She was silly," says Freund (left, with Heidi's friend Melanie Brown). "A real goof." // It is now clear, however, that Guenther had not taken the company's warnings to heart. When Heidi arrived home on June 11, her mother was taken aback at how skinny she looked. "She was thin, too thin, and I said that to her," recalls Harrington. "She said, 'Yeah, I'm going to gain a few pounds.'" Kirsten says that her sister was down to a size 1- "and that looked baggy on her." Harrington was also dismayed to discover that her daughter had started smoking. All the same, Guenther showed no outward signs of an eating disorder. At a barbecue she reluctantly ate just a small piece of steak. But her spirits were good, she seemed to have plenty of energy, and no one caught her throwing up after a meal. "If I have acted on it," says Harrington. Photograph "I always had tears in my eyes when she danced," says Heidi's father. // On June 30, Heidi, her mother and Quinton set out by car for their annual visit to Disneyland. Heidi was laughing and joking much of the way. They stopped to stay overnight with longtime family friends Rosie and Randy Morrison. "She looked much thinner than I had ever seen her-ever," says Rosie. When she asked Heidi what she weighed she just "blew me off." Around 9 p.m., after a quick run to the convenience store, Patti, Rosie and Heidi were stopped at a gas station in Paso Robles when Heidi suddenly fell backward in the minivan. "No gasp, no cry, no nothing," says her mother. "When I opened the door and she fell out, her eyes were fixed, her lips were blue." Frantic, Patti began screaming, "Heidi, wake up! she was pronounced dead at a local hospital. A later search of her belongings uncovered a stash of over-the-counter laxatives. She was also taking herbal pills, which she may have been using as a diet aid. Just how her weight loss could have contributed to her death is speculative. An autopsy showed no heart deformities, and tests revealed no unusual substances in her blood. But doctors caution that excessive use of diet aids can, under certain circumstances, lead to cardiac arrest. And the family did have a history of heart trouble. Richard Guenther's father died of heart failure at age 37, and his mother and sister have also suffered attacks. Photograph "She tried to push herself," says sister Kirsten with brother Quinton. "it was like, if you're going to do it, do it right." Photograph "I don't know when I'll be able to see The Nutcracker again," says Patti (with her daughter's ballet slippers and other mementos). // tried to encourage his daughter-who never even had time for a serious boyfriend-to live a more rounded life. "I knew she wasn't going to be able to do this forever," he says. "I'd tell her, 'Heidi, you can't put all your eggs in one basket.'" But for the moment, she wouldn't hear such talk. "She was very headstrong, dedicated and focused," he says. As many experts would agree, young women with eating disorders often exhibit an extreme perfectionism, though doctors are wary of predicting which individuals are most at risk. "There's a complex psychological underpinning to eating disorders," says Dr. Michael Strober of the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute, who treated actress Tracey Gold when she developed anorexia. "The question becomes, why do some people in the face of pressures to control the body's natural form develop these problems," he says, "and others do not." In the aftermath of Heidi's death help young athletes and dancers cope with the pressures of their careers. For now, they are left only with fond memories of a slip of a girl who loved ladybugs, sunflowers and, above all else, dancing. Her father recalls one trip he made with Heidi to Flagstaff, Ariz., in 1992. During a severe thunderstorm it suddenly started to hail. "Ahh, I've never danced in the snow," said Heidi. With the hail pelting down and covering the ground, she ran outside and began dancing a scene from Swan Lake in the street. With each pirouette, says her father, she seemed to become more and more lost in her own fantasy. * BILL HEWITT * GABRIELLE SAVERI and KEN BAKER in San Francisco, LYNDON STAMBLER and JULIE JORDAN in Los Angeles and NANCY DAY in Boston
"I used to be so alone," says Copeland (embracing a young client). "Now I'm happy. I'm all I ever hoped I could be." Photograph // Mary Jo Copeland brings faith, hope and unstinting charity to people desperately in need of all three At most homeless shelters, new arrivals are given the basics: a cot, a blanket and a plain hot meal. Mary Jo Copeland believes that is not enough. At her charity in Minneapolis, the 5' 6" dynamo-who drives a white 1998 Lincoln Continental with PRAYNOW license plates-doesn't give her clients just a pat on the back or even a gentle caress on the cheek. She gets down on her knees and washes their feet. In a hard-knock world, that simple gesture of compassion is enough to bring tears to the eyes of Wayne Irving, a homeless laborer who arrived in Minneapolis by bus from Chicago. "Nobody ever did this for me," he says, sitting over a basin of hot, sudsy water as Copeland, 57 rubs his calloused feet with antiseptic ointment. "I've never met a lady like her in my life." That's because there aren't very many women like Copeland. With little more than a card table and a couple of coffeepots, she founded a storefront charity 14 years ago on the edge of downtown Minneapolis. Today she is the guiding light of Sharing and Caring Hands, a $3 million nonprofit community center that caters daily to as many as 1,800 of the city's needy, dispensing everything from hot meals and bus tokens to eyeglasses and deodorant. "It's heartwarming to see thousands of people benefit," says Jim Ramstad, a local congressman and sometime volunteer. "Nobody does more to help people in need. Mary Jo is a true saint-Minnesota's Mother Teresa." Copeland, who draws no salary, says her work springs from a biblical mandate. "I believe in what Jesus said about helping the less fortunate in memory of him," she says. "That to be servants of the poor." But there's more to her motivation. An emotional woman who sometimes breaks into tears when talking about her life, Copeland-married for 38 years and the mother of 12 grown children-traces her empathy for the homeless, the working poor and abandoned young mothers to what she describes as her own painful past. The daughter of a Minneapolis clothing salesman and his wife, a hairdresser, Copeland says that while she was growing up, "my mother didn't clean the house. Everything was filthy. My dad would get up at 3 in the morning and rant and rave. He'd beat my mom .... I'd lie in my bed scared to death." Gertrude Holtby, Copeland's late mother, cautioned in a 1992 newspaper interview that her daughter was prone to exaggeration and was "always a little different, high-strung." Still, she acknowledged that her daughter's perspective on life was shaded in part by her difficult youth. Copeland's compassion for the dispossessed a caring mother as well as the emotional trials she faced after two miscarriages and a deep depression that led to a struggle with Valium. She says she quit the drug after five years, "cold turkey, on my own. One day I said, "No more."" Photograph Weighing requests from petitioners with volunteer Emily Bastian (right), Copeland says, "I try to make the right decision." // To Copeland's devoted followers, the details of her past matter far less than her undeniable generosity. "When she was growing up, my mom didn't have love, caring or anyone saying, "Hey, you can do it. We're praying for you,"" says Copeland's son Mark, 31, her $39,520-a-year general manager and one of the center's seven salaried employees. "And that's what we do here-we offer hope, prayer and whatever practical help people need." Photograph "All day long I rely on God," says "It's total trust // And they need plenty. On a typical morning, Mary jo rises at her customary 3:45 a.m. A faithful Catholic, she says a rosary while racewalking for exercise around her parish church. Soon she is at the center, comforting the teary mother of two toddlers, who tells her that she is trying to escape an abusive relationship. "I'll help you, honey," says Copeland, planning to find the family a spot in her 56-apartment transitional-housing facility. "We'll put you in a nice, safe place to stay." In the same breath, Copeland suddenly spins to confront a stylishly dressed youth talking on a cell phone. "How dare you bring that into a shelter!" she shouts. "Why aren't you out working? You get out of here right now! Come on, let's go!" The whip-cracking is part of the Copeland style as she plays field marshal to a corps of 1,000 volunteers while juggling requests ask for help with car payments, rent or finding a job. "I've seen people try to put one over on her, but she puts her foot down," says Carrie Dahlquist, a recovering alcoholic. "Sometimes she loses her temper, but I don't blame her. People have to act right." Copeland is just as strict with the center's purse strings. According to the Charities Review Council of Minnesota, a local watchdog group, an impressive 94 percent of the center's $3 million annual operating budget is channeled directly to the poor. (Copeland has raised an additional $13 million in various building drives, all from private donations.) "Every nickel you give is going to a needy person," says Tom Lowe, 67, chairman of a local lumber company, who has donated more than $600,000 over the past seven years. "Mary Jo sets an example for this kind of work." For Copeland, who raised her own sizable family in an four-bedroom house in a nearby suburb, frugality-and hardship-are nothing new. As a girl, she says, "I remember living in a corner of my room. My dad worked, but he didn't give us anything. I'd go to the bingo halls at night, when my mother played for food. Sometimes we ate. Sometimes we didn't." For solace, Copeland turned to the church, cutting flowers from neighbors' gardens to place in front of a statue of the Blessed Virgin. "People thought I was a little goofy, being so religious," she says. "But it gave me such comfort. It was all I had." Photograph Along with providing more traditional charity, Copeland follows biblical ex ample by washing some of her clients blistered feet. "Mary Jo's work affects my whole life," says homemaker and volunteer Cappy Moore. // At least until a mixer during her sophomore year in high school, when she met Dick Copeland, son of sparked with her," he recalls. "After that, we were together, dating, like you did back in the '50s." According to Dick, 58, an executive buyer for a grocery-store chain, his parents didn't approve of his troubled girlfriend: "My mother was sophisticated and controlling. She had her own ideas of what she wanted for me, and Mary jo wasn't it." For her part, Mary jo remembers going to the Copeland house for dinner, "but they wouldn't let me eat with them. I'd have to sit in the car." Despite his parents "opposition, Dick married Mary jo in 1961, and by 1977 they were the parents of six boys and six girls, now ages 22 to 37. Family life was "incredibly gratifying, but exhausting," recalls Mary jo. "I didn't have any friends, and the neighbors thought I was crazy for having all those kids. I was dealing with stress of all those pregnancies" -not to mention the miscarriages. For several years beginning in the mid-70s, she lived in her housecoat, seldom venturing outside. Then in 1981, when their youngest child, daughter Molly, left for preschool, Dick encouraged his wife to expand her universe beyond the family's needs. "She'd spent all those years at home and didn't know what she was going to do," he says. "I told her she had to take all that love into the world." That year, Copeland volunteered at a local branch of Catholic Charities but soon ran afoul of its bureaucracy. "They wouldn't deviate from their policies," she says. "If people were hungry and the food shelf was closed for the day, I'd run out to my car and get them some food." Four years later, using $2,200 from a public-service award, she signed a three-year, $36,000 lease on a small storefront that has grown to include a in 1997. There, on Sundays when she's not tending her garden or doting on her 13 grandchildren, Copeland can be found with her daughter Barbara, 30, a lab technician, cleaning toilets and setting out silk flowers and potpourri. "I grew up with everything so dirty," she says with a conspiratorial wink. "I like everything to be spotless." Photograph "We have weekends to look forward to," says Dick Copeland (dancing with Mary Jo at a local night spot) //

The youngsters in Ronni Cohen's entrepreneurship class learn more than what it takes to sell the products they invent. They learn how to sell themselves
Entrepreneurship Educator: Ronni Cohen, Burnett Elementary School
A student enrolls in a course titled Economics, Technology, and Entrepreneurship Education and submits the following design abstract for the class's Inventor's Portfolio component:
"Eating pasta has never been easy. Most people won't eat spaghetti dishes at a restaurant because they find it embarrassing to eat. My pasta twirler makes eating spaghetti fun and easy. You'll never have to be embarrassed again."
Before she submits her idea, the student takes pains to complete the homework required of an entrepreneur: initial market research to identify a need; product research and development to meet that need; a determination of the land, labor, and capital requirements of production; and market surveys to hit upon a competitive price as well as a catchy name for the product.
Nothing remarkable there. But what saves the Pasta Twirler from the Annals Jessica McClafferty. Her occupation? She's a student at Burnett Elementary School, in Wilmington, Del. Her age? Ten.
Jessica is among scores of Wilmington students who've been taught entrepreneurship at a tender age by an extraordinary elementary-school teacher, Ronni Cohen. For almost a quarter of a century, "Miss Cohen" -- this year's Entrepreneurship Educator of the Year -- has been enlightening fourth graders about economic concepts such as scarcity, opportunity costs, and profit, and even about the intricacies of the Federal Reserve and the U.S. currency systems.
This year Cohen was one of 85 contenders for the Entrepreneurship Educator award. The judging panels singled her out for her "phenomenal" teaching materials, which she creatively synthesizes from sources as varied as newspaper comic strips and children's books such as The Toothpaste Millionaire. Cohen also won praise for her innovative teaching methods and her devotion to teaching entrepreneurship. She's clearly passionate about the broad impact her techniques can have at a tender age. award application: "Elementary-age students are too young for entrepreneurship education. NOT!"
Her style is hands-on, far removed from the rote lecture formula often found in the classroom. "You don't say, The definition of demand is..., ' o explains Cohen." Cooperative-learning groups provide opportunities for collaboration, brainstorming, and collegial exchange. "Her students learn by doing. On Market Days the children form" corporations' and sell their "products" in the classroom. They learn how money moves in a program called Bank on It!, using an in-school bank that Cohen persuaded the school (and the bank, Wilmington Trust) to open in the fall of 1992. A unit called EconoM &Mics; uses M &M; candies to teach business basics such as production of goods and services, sunk costs, competition, and brand-name loyalty. (Two excerpted questions: "What seasonal items illustrate the concept of sunk cost?" "What factors might make you choose M &Ms; instead of a gadget to solve a problem, Cohen's students devise inventions such as a hamster-propelled ball that mops the floor. And they knock on doors, polling neighbors to determine preferred names for their products.
The junior entrepreneurs meet the kinds of business contacts their grown-up counterparts interact with regularly. Frequent classroom visitors include patent lawyers, bankers, and other businesspeople, as well as the children's parents. "I don't think we can stand at the front of the classroom and lecture any longer," says the 46-year-old teacher. "I don't think we learn that way."
The sponsors of this year's Entrepreneurship Educator of the Year award couldn't agree with her more. Shortly before his death, last August, Ewing Marion Kauffman, benefactor of the Kansas City, Mo., nonprofit foundation bearing his name, decided to devote a portion of his billion-dollar estate to discovering and celebrating the Ronni Cohens of the world. "As he looked at the ills of society, he thought communities is to have a strong entrepreneurial base," explains Calvin Ward, associate fellow for training and development at the Kauffman Foundation's Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership. "One way of encouraging that is through the Educator of the Year award."
As this year's winner, Cohen will receive a $15,000 stipend to spend a summer at the foundation, where she will be given the opportunity to "tweak, revamp, refine, and further develop her teaching innovations," says Ward. The ultimate goal? To disseminate her teachings throughout the country.
Talk about a tough homework assignment. Though entrepreneurship, as an academic subject, has been creeping into curricula since the late 1960s, it has yet to achieve status as a required discipline. Part of the reason is the subject's innate quirkiness. "I've often wondered how you teach a course in entrepreneurship. How do you teach a course on hanging by your fingernails?" quips B. Thomas Golisano, chief executive of Paychex Inc.,'s Entrepreneur of the Year judges.
There's a view that entrepreneurship education is hampered by ambivalence; some critics charge that it smacks of corporate control of public education. Still, inroads are being made. The Clinton administration's School-to-Work Initiative is inspiring new business-education partnerships around the country. Two innovative economic and entrepreneurship education programs, KinderEconomy and Mini-Society, are being taught at **26;710;TOOLONG levels in an estimated 100,000 classrooms in 40-odd states. Nonprofit business-education organizations like Junior Achievement are upping enrollment in their elementary, middle, and high school programs every year. And entrepreneurship is flourishing as a topic of study at universities and business schools worldwide.
The entrepreneurial nature of entrepreneurship education makes the subject difficult to standardize and incorporate into a national core curriculum. "The reality with any K-12 program is that you're not going to disseminate it nationally until you pilot it somewhere, reveal its benefits with concrete evidence, and make sure it's not dependent just on the teacher's personality," cautions Marilyn Kourilsky, of the KinderEconomy and Mini-Society programs. Kourilsky, recently appointed vice-president of the foundation's K-12 and community-college division, will oversee the dissemination of Cohen's teachings. She says her primary concerns will be replication and copyright infringement, because Cohen's lessons are derived from a variety of sources.
The entrepreneur of the Year judges gave Cohen high marks for the creativity of her materials, which, they felt, "are meant to develop a very basic hands-on understanding from everyday life as to how the banking system and other business transactions work."
Student accounts bear this out. In addition to experiencing the life of an inventor last year, Jessica McClafferty received on-the-job training as a bank teller in the school's on-site branch of Wilmington Trust. Jacqui DeLorbe, 10, one of Jessica's classmates, took a shine to supply-and-demand charts while developing her pasta implement, the Wonder Wheel. Her mother, Terry DeLorbe, likes to tell the story of Jacqui's comment at the mall when she wanted two My opportunity cost, Mom."
Reports from Cohen's older graduates are equally encouraging. Kelley Heck, a 16-year-old junior at Brandywine High School, in Wilmington, is planning a career in marketing when she finishes school, based on the exposure to the field she received in Miss Cohen's class seven years ago. "The competitions we entered got me used to speaking before people and selling products," she recalls. Heck is a member of Distributive Education Clubs of America, an international group for marketing students.
While Cohen's teaching methods instill an excitement about business in her students, they also convey lessons about failure that any embattled entrepreneur would understand. Unfettered by society's scrutiny, her students are tenacious: if one idea for a business doesn't fly, they eagerly come up with another.
For Cohen, there's much more to her craft than simply training the tycoons of tomorrow. She emphasizes that entrepreneurship goes beyond preparation for business. "Each of us is an ourselves. You may not have a business, but you still have to sell yourself. That's what entrepreneurship education does. It gives the kids confidence in themselves for whatever they do."
ILLUSTRATION: (ELLEN WEINSTEIN)
PHOTO: School's boring. NOT! Ronni Cohen (front) teaches kids like Jessica McCafferty that being an entrepreneur can be way cool. (DAVID FIELDS)
By Alessandra Bianchi
DIARY OF A JUNIOR ENTREPRENEUR
Each year, Miss Cohen devotes a month to Pastamania, an assignment in which students devise a tool to facilitate spaghetti eating. The following entries are excerpted from the inventor's log of Jessica McClafferty.
11/6, 30 minutes: Talked with Mom and Dad about some of my ideas. 11/10, 20 minutes: Got the idea to use clothespins and forks. Tried putting the clothespins and forks together and could not get it to work. 11/12, 20 minutes: Watched my family eating spaghetti and got the idea to use an egg-beater. minutes: Went to library to get ideas from books. Worked more on the egg-beater idea. Didn't like the way it was working. 11/15, 20 minutes: Got an idea from watching Mom washing potatoes with a vegetable brush. Used rubber bands instead of noodles to see if they would stay on the brush. It worked. 11/16, 30 minutes: Thought about ways to use the vegetable brush as part of my invention. Found an old hairbrush. I removed the bristles from the handle. I tested the hair-brush with the rubber bands and it worked. 11/17, 30 minutes: Helped Mom make spaghetti for dinner. Tried using the hairbrush to pick up the noodles. 11/18, 30 minutes: Found an old paint roller. Worked on ways to put the brush on the paint roller. I couldn't think of a way. 11/20, 20 minutes: Used dental floss to tie the brushes to the roller. Needed something to keep the brush and roller from hitting the handle. Dad caulk gun worked. 11/22, 45 minutes: The dental floss was not strong enough. Tried using fishing line. Tested again. Found that it was hard to control the movement of the brush. 11/24, 30 minutes: Changed to a smaller paint roller and glued the brushes to the roller instead of using the fishing line. Looked around the house for something to attach to the brush to help control the rolling. Found the egg-beater and thought the lever would work. 11/25, 20 minutes: Dad helped me remove the eggbeater lever. Needed something small and round to mount the lever to. Found a hubcap on an old lawn mower that was just the right size. Glued the hubcap and lever together and glued to the roller. 11/25, 15 minutes: Tested it and it worked.
PHOTO: Jessica McClafferty
Section: EMERGING ENTREPRENEUR
Consolidation may be the growth strategy of the moment. Paul Verrochi is building an empire by knitting together a highly localized mom-and-pop industry, and he's creating a national juggernaut in the process
For a guy who knew nothing about ambulances four years ago, Paul Verrochi has come a long way. Since launching American Medical Response (AMR), in August 1992, he has built the country's largest ambulance company, now with $550 million in annualized revenues, some 10,000 employees, and operations in 26 states. And fueled by a $100-million credit line and $90 million from a stock offering last spring, expansion is going full tilt.
One of the most striking parts of Verrochi's story is that he has built a big, successful business not once but three times. Each business has been a consolidation play, and Verrochi's basic approach -- a "Pac Man strategy," one analyst calls it -- hasn't changed much. He enters a fragmented industry, acquires the best companies available, and knits them together 24 years he and his longtime partner, accountant Dominic Puopolo, have engineered more than 150 deals.
Verrochi's entrepreneurial bug bit him early. In 1971, fresh out of the Merchant Marine Academy, he started a building-maintenance business. "My mother was appalled," he recalls. "Here I was -- a college graduate -- scrubbing toilets." He grew that company to revenues of $18 million, with 10,000 employees in six states, and then sold out to a British company. During a three-year earn-out, sales soared to $120 million as Verrochi scarfed up cleaning services from New England to Atlanta.
Act 2 was an asbestos-removal outfit called American Environmental Group. Starting with three merged companies and $8 million in sales, Verrochi took the business to $35 million in three years. He stayed on for two years after he sold it to All waste, a big public company, buying 15 more companies and building revenues to $106 million.
At 46 Verrochi is into his third and possibly. "I've already made enough money," he says. Not that he's complacent. As chairman, CEO, and development honcho, he's on the road several days a week, focused on dominating an industry projected to hit $10 billion by the year 2000.
The ambulance business wasn't even on Verrochi's radar screen in the fall of 1991, when he and Puopolo leased office space in Boston and cast about for a new consolidation candidate. When their banker suggested ambulances, Verrochi was intrigued. "I discovered there were 2,200 private companies in the field, mostly mom-and-pop operations," he says. "Some had consolidated regionally, but nobody had gone public, and venture capitalists were nowhere in sight, so it hadn't been picked over. It was undiscovered, which made it perfect for us."
With help from the industry's top consultant, Verrochi pulled together four top-notch ambulance operators-two in California and one each in Delaware and Connecticut, with combined revenues of 1992. He and Puopolo spent $2 million to lay the legal and accounting groundwork and then financed the deal as an initial public offering on the New York Stock Exchange, raising $23.7 million. "That was the first time it had ever been done on that exchange, a consolidation like this, so it was classic," Verrochi says.
Since then Verrochi has put some 50 companies under AMR's roof. "Paul has brought this industry of age," says Earl Riggs, whose $55-million operation in the San Francisco Bay area was the largest of the founding four. "I'd been buying small companies around me for years, to get bigger and more profitable. I thought the industry needed to do that on a larger scale, and Paul's vision was national."
Verrochi's company-building strategy rests on several planks:
Market dominance. Verrochi opens a new territory by acquiring its strongest player -- his "beachhead" -- which is usually a company in the **25;3545;TOOLONG range, is, at $80 million, New England's largest operator. He's picky, preferring companies that have been in business at least 20 years and have sound management, deep community roots, and dedication to quality service. And he looks for operators "whose egos are in check," he says, "so they'll be good partners." By and large, the operators stay at their posts, running the beachheads as staging grounds for the acquisition of smaller companies in the region. By financing the deals with a 50-50 combination of cash and restricted stock (the new partners can't sell their shares for two years), Verrochi gives his partners an incentive to help build the business. If AMR's stock price goes up -- and it's more than tripled since 1992 -- they reap the rewards. "All entrepreneurs want an exit strategy," Verrachi says. "This gives them a chance to take some money off the table and stay in the game. We take over the and insurance, and let them focus on building a region. The idea is to funnel more business through that beachhead chute. We bought a $7-million company in Mississippi, for example, and today it's doing $40 million. It bought up Monroe, La.; New Orleans; Jackson, Miss. -- gobbled up the whole area."
AMR corporate headquarters, in Boston, with a lean group of 25 employees, handles due-diligence chores for each acquisition, puts a price tag on the deal, and funds it, but it's the job of the beachhead operator to find candidates. Verrochi himself explores the character issue. "When you buy a company, you are taking on a partner," he explains. "You have to get inside each other's heads to make sure this will work on a personal level. I want to break bread with them, so I invite them to my house for a few days. I want my wife to meet them, because sometimes I looks at the protection side -- she doesn't want me to get hurt. They see the kids, see them act up.
"It's a family thing," he says. "By the end, we know if it's a good fit. If anything feels wrong, we back off from the deal, and that's why we don't make many mistakes."
So far, the beachhead strategy has worked, giving AMR strongholds in California, Michigan, New England, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Florida, Colorado, Illinois, Mississippi, Washington State, Oklahoma, and Hawaii.
Operating synergies. Each region runs as a separately incorporated business and cuts costs by centralizing such common functions as accounting, payroll, human resources, and purchasing. To get an idea of what AMR does systemwide, consider how American Medical Response of Connecticut Inc., the $15-million beach-head in New Haven, bought a $5-million company in nearby Bridgeport.
As Verrochi describes financial officers, and safety and risk-management people. We made New Haven the hub. The old CEO in Bridgeport left, the CFO we didn't need, and communications and vehicle maintenance all went to New Haven. We took a business with $5 million in revenues and $200,000 in pretax profits, and raised profits to $800,000 just by eliminating redundancies. The goal is to lower the cost per trip. In today's health-care environment, you can't raise prices. Contracts are won and retained by companies that deliver the highest quality at the lowest cost."
Technology. AMR's municipal contracts for 911-call response require that its ambulances be at the scene within eight minutes at least 90% of the time, so they must always be ready to roll. A fully equipped ambulance costs about $100,000, and labor adds another $300,000 a year to each ambulance's operating bud-get -- a pair of paramedics is always on board. (The cost of an ambulance ride, from $250 to $750 depending on the location to the passenger.) Collectively, AMR's 1,700 ambulances represent a huge cost center, and Verrochi is attacking it with high technology.
Earl Riggs, the California operator, already had a satellite-based dispatch system in place when he joined AMR and consolidated operations with a partner company in the Silicon Valley area. The two companies had 100 ambulances between them. But the global-positioning satellite system (GPS) enabled the new AMR West to cover the same territory with 86 vehicles, for a labor-cost savings of $4.2 million a year.
"Before, dispatchers would run the ambulances by zones," Riggs explains. "The GPS pinpoints the street locations of the ambulances every 14 seconds and updates the dispatch center accordingly. You can actually watch on the wall map as the ambulances move along the freeway, and the computer-aided dispatch automatically calculates travel times based on traffic patterns. Now we can send the ambulances closest to the call -- not in distance, but in time. So we're able to utilize GPS technology to trim the ambulance fleet companywide, but these are multi-million-dollar systems, and cost effectiveness demands critical mass. "We went into Denver and bought four companies, which gave us the heft to afford a GPS system," he says. "When you have 80 ambulances and can eliminate 10 or 15 of them, you can start paying for it." For now, only California and Denver have GPS capability, but AMR units in Chicago, Philadelphia, Mississippi, and Connecticut are slated for installations soon.
Since the advent of AMR, three other ambulance companies have gone public to emulate its strategy. But AMR is the behemoth in the field, and Verrochi is gunning for more. "There were 2,200 private companies when we started, and there are 2,000 left -- we have only 50," he says. "We have lots of room to grow." THE WINNER PAUL VERROCHI
COMPANY: American Medical Response, Boston
FOUNDED: 1992 1994 REVENUES: $327 million 6,210
BUSINESS: Nationwide ambulance service THE RUNNERS-UP ROBERT J. LAIKIN
COMPANY: Brightpoint Inc., Indianapolis
FOUNDED: 1989 1994 REVENUES: $169 million 1994 PROFITS: $4.6 million
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: 75
BUSINESS: Distributor of cellular-phone equipment ERIC C. COOPER
COMPANY: FORE Systems Inc., Warrendale, Pa.
FOUNDED: 1990 1994 REVENUES: $48 million 1994 PROFITS: $7.3 million
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: 284
BUSINESS: Manufacturer of high-speed computer networking products Consolidated Income
Consolidation of fragmented industries is now a major trend, as witnessed by this years winner in the Emerging Entrepreneur of the Year category. But it's nothing new. Consider that in 1898 there were more than 2,000 automobile manufacturers (actually, buckboard wagon manufacturers who were incorporating motors into their products) in the United Stales. "The life cycle of entrepreneurial firms is not that different today than it was 100 years ago," observes Tom O'Malia, director of the entrepreneur program at the University of Southern California. "businesses."
Indeed, the Chicago venture-capital firm of Golder, Thoma, Cressey, Rauner Inc. (GTCR) is engaged in the consolidation of same 25 industries, including golf courses, rock quarries, temp agencies, funeral homes, security guards, and even coin-operated laundries in apartment buildings. "When you combine companies, you get true synergies and savings. By bringing together products and services, you also build market power. And also, of course, you can leverage good people and good systems through companies that are acquired," explains Bryan Cressey, a GTCR principal.
For the individual entrepreneur in a consolidating field, it's decision time. "You can either be part of it and use it as an opportunity to cash in your chips, or you can fight it and become more of a lifestyle business," O'Malia says. "If you fight, you are going to have to compete on a different level as consolidation goes through. You'll have to be and you must add value."
Cressey, who has been financing consolidations since the 1970s (GTCR has about $400 million invested in such ventures), recommends that entrepreneurs first examine the consolidation's rationale. "If there are real savings and economies, then that probably will continue," he says. "But if benefits don't materialize -- and they don't always -- it will be status quo for a long time. The downside risk for entrepreneurs who hold out against smart consolidations depends on how good they are. If they are very good managers, there's not a big downside. But if they're in the middle of the pack, the consolidation wave of lower costs could roll over them."
PHOTO (COLOR): Paul Verrochi
PHOTO (COLOR): AMR's 1,700 ambulances represent a huge cost center that Verrochi is attacking with satellite technology.
By JAY FINEGAN
Section: Opportunities
Forging partnerships with other companies may be the smartest way to acquire or upgrade your technology. Just ask Jeremy Davey
The elevator opens directly into the seventh-floor suite, penthouse-style. The office walls are an eye-popping shade of neon chartreuse, and San Francisco's picturesque Nob Hill stretches for blocks outside a large window in the reception area. Workers sit before six state-of-the-art **29;5233;TOOLONG, busily adjusting the palettes and design elements that flash on their 15- and 20-inch screens.
Welcome to the nerve center of Pabulum Internet Advertising Agency Inc., an up-and-coming Web-site-design and Internet-ad company that lives up to the image of what a bold young high-tech business should be, and then some.
It's hard to imagine that only a short time ago this well-appointed brick building was largely vacant and in various stages of disrepair -- and that the lean, energetic Englishman who runs the business, Jeremy Davey, was working out of an eight-byfour-foot converted closet with practically no capital to help him realize his ambition of breaking into the competitive domain of electronic commerce. The weaving together a series of partnerships that landed him posh office digs at well below the market rate and a costly high-speed telephone line free from a giant telecommunications company -- is a compelling tale of the good things that can happen when a flair for seizing opportunity meshes neatly with the forces of serendipity. But it also provides a lesson for growing companies of all kinds: the smartest way to acquire or upgrade technology may be not by handing over cash or relying on credit and interest-accruing rental agreements but by forging partnerships with companies that have what you need.
Indeed, partnering to leverage technology investments may be the wave of the future. A 1997 survey conducted by Arthur Andersen's Enterprise Group and National Small Business United found that CEOs of small and midsize companies plan to invest 3.3% of their total 1998 revenues in technology. And the outlay will likely only get larger: evermore-sophisticated (read: expensive) technologies, such as electronic data interchange and high-speed T1 telephone lines, are becoming the norm, and small-company in their operating budgets -- somehow -- to stay competitive.
Trading goods and services for technology is not as far-fetched as it might sound. According to John Harbison, a partner in charge of the Strategic Alliances Practice unit of the management-consulting firm Booz, Allen &; Hamilton Inc., such arrangements are becoming increasingly attractive to technology companies as well. In exchange for providing small businesses with technology at reduced rates, says Harbison, those companies improve their chances of getting something that money can't necessarily buy: immediate access to a wider customer base and the opportunity to achieve greater market penetration in desirable business sectors. Bartering for technology, Harbison cautions, does require a good deal of stamina and resourcefulness on the part of a small-business owner (Davey's story is a case in point), and the bigger the company you're trying to court, the more layers of resistance you're likely to meet. But the payoff can be well worth the time spent wheeling and dealing, particularly if you're a.
Just ask Jeremy Davey. He founded Pabulum in March 1997, convinced that the brave new world of the Web was going to be the next big thing in marketing and advertising. Initially, the business was a one-man show: Davey would work with customers on developing promotional Web sites with his Pentium 133 notebook and then farm out the graphics-intensive components of the design, such as photo manipulation and streaming video, to subcontractors that had the equipment to do the job. It didn't take him long to realize, however, that the field of on-line marketing was crowded with entrepreneurs. If Davey wanted Pabulum to grow, he was going to have to be something more than just another digital-ad guy with bright ideas and a trusty laptop.
So he began to hatch a vision for a new kind of electronic-advertising venture: rather than simply designing Web sites by contract, he would develop whole blocks of cyberspace into centers of electronic commerce, the equivalent of selling virtual real estate. Here's how register for a broad domain name in a popular business sector (say, www.webwines.com or www.bookshops.com). Next, he'd construct a Web site with that domain name. Then he would set up commerce on the site, contracting out space to suppliers of those goods or services, much like a developer of a strip mall leasing out units to individual merchants. As the site gained traffic he would solicit advertising to bring in additional revenues. Finally, he'd sell the site to an actual purveyor or manufacturer of the goods or services mentioned in the name (a wine wholesaler, for instance), retain a percentage interest in the business, and move on to another registered domain name (say, www. workouts.com) to begin the process anew. According to Davey's projections, the new and improved Pabulum could expect to generate $1.6 million in annual revenues in two years.
Big plans, but how could a tiny company with no cash flow possibly transform itself into a Web dynamo? To was going to have to move heaven and earth. He would need a slew of computers equipped with top-of-the-line scanners and the latest design software. He would have to abandon that cramped cubicle and set up shop in a bona fide office. Most important, he would need a high-speed, full-time telephone connection to the Internet -- a hookup requiring costly installation and servicing fees. Yet only a year after forming Pabulum, Davey was well on his way to making his vision a reality, not by hammering out financing deals with banks but by orchestrating partnerships with business interests that stood to gain from Pabulum's success.
"Everything I've done, I've done because I've had no money," Davey says with typical disarming candor. "People seem to recognize and admire determination. If they believe in you, I guess they believe you'll pay -- eventually! When I look back I often wonder how I got to where I am. A lot of people helped along the way, and
Jeremy Davey's career as a **26;5264;TOOLONG builder began, ironically enough, with a piece of real real estate: that seven-story building, at 701 Sutter Street, in San Francisco's fashionable Nob Hill district. It was September 1997, and Davey was pounding the pavement in search of office space that could serve as Pabulum's new base of operations. As soon as he laid eyes on the Sutter Street site, he was smitten -- so much so that he not only began to formulate a plan for leasing all five floors of its available commercial space but also vowed to base the design of Pabulum's new logo on the wrought-iron grating around the balcony. "The building was pretty much vacant," he says, "and the whole idea of bringing in companies that could assist Pabulum in realizing its new business model formed in my head."
Davey's plan was at once simple and bold. If he could land a master lease on the whole building, he figured, he could be both his tenants and his business partners. And he reckoned that the perfect lure to attract those companies would be to wire the entire building with a high-speed T1 telephone line. Since he was going to need one himself, why not make it available to all the tenants and boost the value of his investment? Buildings wired with a T1 line are in heavy demand in areas like San Francisco, where high-tech companies abound: T1 lines are much faster than plain old telephone service (POTS), and they allow for a continuous connection to the Internet instead of requiring users to dial and log in to an account whenever they need to go on-line. Wired buildings also command premium rents. If Davey could secure a master lease at a bargain price and manage to get a T1 line up and running, he could charge his tenants enough to cover his own rent and create positive cash flow to foot the bill for the rest of the technology Pabulum would need.
But could Davey score that crucial? His inquiries turned up a mix of good news and bad news. The building, he learned, had been foreclosed upon and only recently purchased by its current owner, Albion Pacific Properties LLC, a San Francisco real-estate-development and -- management company. Albion Pacific was renovating the building's shared areas, including the lobby and the elevator, but not the floors, some of which were in terrible condition. Ever the pragmatist, Davey pared down his aspirations from all vacant floors to two, the sixth and the seventh. Then he arranged a meeting with Albion Pacific's leasing agent, Art Wiener, and geared up for some serious negotiating.
The offer that Davey put together was unconventional, to say the least, but it was also too tantalizing for Albion Pacific's president, Andrew Meieran, to pass up. For starters, Davey agreed to pay a $12,000 security deposit (which included rent for January, the first month he'd take ownership) on a five-year lease up front, son't be left holding the bag. The real deal clincher, though, was Davey's proposal to "Internet-enable" 701 Sutter Street at no cost to the real estate company, a move that would significantly increase the building's commercial value -- from $1 to about $2 a square foot. Davey also agreed to help lease out the rest of the building's available space to other Internet-related businesses.
In exchange for those concessions, Meieran agreed to lease Davey the two floors at well below the market rate -- 80 cents a square foot -- for the first year. (After that, Davey's rent would increase each year, and in the fifth year he would be paying the 1997 market value for the two floors.) Meieran also granted Davey's request for a grace period from mid-November to the end of December, before Davey's rent payments kicked in on January 1, so that he could renovate the floors and complete the Wiring installation. For all that to happen, however, much groundwork for getting 701 Sutter Street wired, he had yet to work out the-details. Little did he know that his negotiating had just begun.
Shortly before Albion offered Davey an intent to lease, Davey had made an oral agreement with a telephone and computer-network dealer to have the T1 line installed at a wholesale price. The dealer, in turn, would profit by selling wiring services to the building's future tenants at the going rate. Then, on November 3, the same day Davey signed a renegotiated intent to lease with Albion Pacific, the dealer got cold feet and backed out. Now the pressure was really on: unless Davey could broker another agreement along similar lines, the building of his dreams was going to turn into a house of cards.
The setback, it turned out, was a blessing in disguise. On the same day that Davey learned that the wiring deal had gone sour, he met for lunch with a potential customer to discuss a Web-site project that would provide mention his predicament, his lunch partner recommended that he get in touch with WinStar, a young fixed wireless telecommunications company in Falls Church, Va., that bills itself as "an alternative to the Bell operating companies." WinStar, he informed Davey, was aggressively building its wireless network in San Francisco by acquiring the rights to place the dishes necessary for its wireless services -- everything from local and long-distance calling to wide area networks -- on the roofs of commercial buildings. In exchange for the "roof rights" to a building, WinStar would install a dish, free of charge, that could provide enough bandwidth for that all-important T1 line.
Davey wasted no time following up on the lead. Right after lunch he phoned the WinStar engineers, who were then in town investigating prospective sites for dishes, and explained his plan. Could they meet him at 701 Sutter Street that afternoon to see if the location was appropriate for their network? The WinStar reps agreed, and a few hours later Davey (with leasing agent Art Wiener in tow) to get their take on the site.
The upshot of the meeting was another good news/bad news scenario. On the positive side, 701 Sutter was in "line of sight" of not one but two WinStar transmitters, which meant that the building had two separate access points into WinStar's network. On the downside, Davey's building was far too small for WinStar to consider wiring on its own dime, since the way the company recoups the cost of its free equipment installation is through acquiring new onsite customers for its services. "Typically, WinStar targets buildings that have at least 60,000 to 100,000 square feet," says Davey. "Mine is only 20,000 total."
Rather than giving up, however, Davey decided to find a way to meet WinStar's requirements. Albion Pacific, he knew, also owned a 100,000-square-foot building at 995 Market Street, in downtown San Francisco. So he went back to WinStar with a new pitch could get you roof rights to 995 Market, too? ' That was a complete gamble. I didn't even know Andrew Meieran at the time. I had only worked through his broker Wiener. But I said, 'What if?'" That what-if became Davey's ticket to technological plenty. WinStar agreed to place a dish on the roof of 701 Sutter Street at no cost, contingent on the company's obtaining roof rights to 995 Market Street. As for Meieran, he needed little convincing: outfitting the larger building with high-speed wireless telecommunications fell right in line with his own development plans. "I envisioned building a futuristic multimedia community there," he says.
In fact, Meieran was so gung ho about the idea that he teamed up with Davey to negotiate the specifics of the deal with WinStar. Meieran knew that installing a dish on the roof to provide the T1 line was only the first step in Internet-enabling a site. For the connection to be functional, every be hooked up to the T1 line, a process known as "wiring to the desktop." And he knew that a landlord could rent spaces already wired to the desktop much faster -- and at a much higher rate -- than spaces that required tenants to contract for their own connections.
Sensing they had a formidable bargaining chip with 995 Market Street, Meieran and Davey decided to ask WinStar to absorb the expense of the desktop wiring as part of the deal for the roof rights. Together they drew up a business plan to show WinStar how wiring to the desktop could bring the telecommunications company much higher returns than just placing networking equipment on the roofs of the two sites. With WinStar's own wiring and jacks in place for the dozens of employees who would soon be occupying the offices at each location, their pitch ran, the company would essentially acquire a built-in customer base. "We showed them that' you will benefit by X number of dollars if you were to wire to the desktop pot by offering to use his local contacts in the Internet industry to provide the telecommunications newcomer with vital leads to other potential customers in the area.
The proposal was submitted to WinStar's West Coast managers in charge of San Francisco operations. The projected figures won them over, and they agreed to the ambitious wiring-to-the-desktop plan. Davey was ecstatic. "The estimated valuation of the wiring and equipment for 701 Sutter alone was in excess of $45,000," he says. "It is important to understand that for us it was free."
With the wiring agreement seemingly in place, Davey turned his attention to the remaining hurdle -- his $12,000 security deposit. There wasn't a moment to lose: it was already mid-November 1997, and his intent-to-lease agreement was about to expire. With his checking account down to the double digits, Davey once again decided to up the roof-rights ante: he proposed that WinStar pay $4,000 for the roof rights to each of the two sites and credit the payment to to raise.
This time, however, Davey's creative maneuvering failed to do the trick. There are as yet no hard-and-fast industry standards that govern how payments for roof rights actually change hands; the field is too new, and each deal is still negotiated ad hoc. Although Davey believed he had struck an agreement with WinStar, his security deposit never got credited, and he had to resort to some feverish last-minute hustling to meet his deadline. He wound up having to borrow half the 12 grand from a customer in exchange for help with some upcoming projects. Davey's wife was able to lend him the remaining $6,000, thanks to an insurance-claim payment she received on the very day that Davey needed to hand over his security deposit to Albion Pacific.
By November 20, after weeks of nip-and-tuck negotiations, Davey finally had his deal. His first rent payment wouldn't be due until February 1, which would give him the running start he needed to set up Pabulum's operations at 701 the proud owner of two floors," he recalls. "It's a great space in San Francisco, and the cheapest deal in the city. I didn't have any equipment yet; I just believed it was a good idea."
The ensuing months, however, brought their share of new trials. No sooner had the lease been formalized, Davey says, than WinStar began waffling on its obligations. The top brass at corporate headquarters were now claiming that the required "wiring to the desktop" would be satisfied if they "wired to the router," the device that splits the T1 line from the backbone equipment to the tenants' PCs. The problem is, a wired router still doesn't establish a link to the actual workstations that a business would be using to perform on-line communications. "They were supposed to have the wiring done by January 1," says Meieran. "But they got to fighting among themselves: the tech guys, who said one thing; and part of the technology; and the top guys, who don't know the technology at all and just see the capital investment as this huge amount."
Just like that, Davey's lease was again in limbo. His agreement with Albion Pacific called for him to "Internet-enable" the building, and the vagueness of that language was coming back to haunt him. (Once WinStar had agreed to "wire to the desktop," that became Meieran's definition of the term Internet-enable, and it was Davey's responsibility to sort out the technical details.)
The dispute led to a delay, and with it, Davey's honeymoon ended. He had planned to have until the beginning of January to get the wiring done and the rest of that month to secure a sublessee, but without the wiring completed, he couldn't sublet his other floor at the rate he'd counted on to be able to cover February's rent. And he had even lined up a terrific prospect the market for a wired office and eager to ink a deal. All the company needed was the assurance that the T1 wiring would be up and running, but now that WinStar was stalling, Davey couldn't guarantee a date when the service would actually be in place.
MCR eventually moved in anyway, but rather than leasing out the sixth floor from Davey, the company leased the fourth floor from Albion Pacific at a rate lower than Davey could afford to give. Not only that, but when MCR CEO Matthew Harrigan hired his own contractors to complete the connection to WinStar's T1 line and subtracted the charges from its rent payment to Albion, Meieran turned around and submitted the bills to Davey. After all, under the terms of Davey and Albion's agreement, the building should have been fully Internet-enabled already, and Davey was contractually accountable for any associated expenses.
MCR's wiring bills weren't Davey's only financial headache. Because he was spending virtually all his time haggling with WinStar the billable hours he was able to devote to his Web customers had all but evaporated. By now it was March, and Davey was having to borrow more money to make his rent and -- as he had no line yet for his own telephone service -- to pay for his pricey cell-phone calls. Moreover, he still had an unoccupied floor to rent out.
So Davey did what Davey always did when he found himself in a right spot: he forged yet another strategic alliance -- this time one that would ultimately lead to Pabulum's salvation. He and MCR's Harrigan agreed to form an exclusive joint venture called the IDEAS Group. (IDEAS stands for Internet Design, Engineering and Security.) Together, the two companies would market themselves as a one-stop shop for Internet services, with Pabulum designing the Web interfaces and MCR providing the engineering and security arrangements.
Davey's partnership with MCR was a risky one, since at the outset he had no way of knowing how the wrangle with the impasse, Davey says, was his being able to give WinStar executives hard evidence that they were losing the valuable customer leads he'd originally promised them in exchange for the T1 wiring. "We basically held them for ransom," Davey says, smiling.
WinStar officials would not comment specifically about the delay, saying only in a written statement: "There was a misinterpretation. However, it was resolved to our customer's satisfaction." True, but it took a four-month tussle that tested all of Davey's pluck and mettle as a negotiator.
The turning point had come at the end of March. One of the Internet domain names Davey had registered for in launching his virtual-real-estate plan was www.svb.com, an abbreviation for sauvignon blanc. Davey quickly noticed that confidential E-mail was mysteriously showing up at that address. The correspondence was intended for Silicon Valley Bank, based in Santa Clara, Calif., which was operating a Web site under the name svbank.com. Because the E-mail contained sensitive information domain name www.svb.com to the bank, so that any customers who inadvertently dialed in the abbreviation would be routed directly to the bank's home page. In the process Davey also acquired another key ally: the senior vice-president of Silicon Valley Bank's Emerging Technologies Division, Mark Horn, who took a shine to Davey's entrepreneurial gumption and suggested that the IDEAS Group join the bank's soon-to-be-launched eSource program.
The eSource program, which will enable the bank's business customers to network and team up with one another for crucial business services, is a perfect fit for Davey and Harrigan. It will give the IDEAS Group access to a select pool of businesses that are hot prospects for Web-site design and on-line security services. As for Davey, the deal proved to be a crucial stroke of good fortune: not only did he get a much-needed infusion of cash from the sale of the domain name, but he now had a rich source of customer leads that he could dangle in front of WinStar to show up its end of the wiring bargain.
Dangle he did, and WinStar at last saw the light. By May 1998, 701 Sutter Street had a fully functioning T1 connection wired to the desktop, at no cost to the tenants or the owners. And in confirmation of Davey's initial vision the previous fall, everyone involved has come out ahead. WinStar has won several contracts from Davey's leads. Albion Pacific sold 701 Sutter Street at a profit, with the provision that all existing lease agreements remain intact. And Andrew Meieran is using the 995 Market Street site as the showpiece of what he hopes will be a lucrative chain of "smart" wired properties in both the Bay Area and Southern California.
And Jeremy Davey? To judge by the bustling offices on his seventh-floor aerie -- chartreuse walls and all -- Pabulum's virtual-real-estate realm has a bright future. The money he has saved on rent has enabled him to hire three employees and acquire the key pieces of technology he needed, Pentium 166s used as administrative PCs and design stations, and a battery of servers and server hardware. In addition, he has rented his sixth floor at the $2.10-a-square-foot rate he wanted.
"The great thing about leveraging is that everyone wins," says Davey. "If you make the deal attractive enough, people move very quickly to make it happen."
By Julie Bort

Julie Bort (jbort@colorado.net) is a freelance writer based in Silverthorne, Colo., and coauthor of Building an Extranet (John Wiley &; Sons, 1997).
LET'S MAKE A DEAL
Jeremy Davey's wired-to-the-desktop T1 line is a best-case example of what strategic alliances can get you. Yet most every business can benefit from such partnerships in some fashion, says John Harbison of the management-consulting firm Booz, Allen &; Hamilton. "Alliances are a powerful option for all kinds of companies," Harbison claims. "But the need is even greater in high tech, where companies are growing so rapidly themselves. There are lots of opportunities for companies to come in and help in exchange for technology."
Some tips, from those who've been there, on how to leverage your technology investments through partnerships:
John Harbison: Consider alliances with large companies, especially those with a track record in them. Over a recent five-year period AT &T,; for example, has formed more than 300 partnership agreements with companies of all sizes. But allow extra time for negotiations: decision making at large companies usually takes a while, and you're likely to run into some red tape.
Matthew Harrigan, CEO of MCR: Know exactly what you want out of a deal from the outset. Make sure your proposal states clearly who is going to do what and by when, and have options available on how to get each task accomplished.
Jeremy Davey, CEO of Pabulum: Tailor your deal for your prospective partner, specifying how a partnership will tangibly benefit that company's business. The more that you'll cut a deal quickly.
Mark Horn, senior vice-president of Silicon Valley Bank's Emerging Technologies Division: Always be on the lookout for potential alliances. Be creative in envisioning how you might team up with companies all across the business spectrum.
Andrew Meieran, president of Albion Pacific Properties: Choose potential partners both by the technology they offer and by their financials. Make sure they have the capital to do their part. Then, ask the right questions of the people who have the authority to respond, and get all aspects of the deal in writing.
Section: Snapshots HALL OF FAME OVERVIEW
IN 1986, SEVEN COMPAnies achieved something that, frankly, seemed inconceivable: they made the Inc. 500 list for the fifth time. To honor those that have accomplished that striking and unusual feat, several years ago we created the Inc. 500 Hall of Fame. As of 1999, 52 companies had been inducted, including 12 that made the list six times.
To find out how the Hall of Fame CEOs and their companies were faring, Inc. attempted to contact all 52 of them this past summer. We reached 48 companies, and 30 of those we contacted responded to a detailed written survey. The results? All 48 are still in business, have merged with another company, or have been acquired. Some have ripened into very large companies that employ thousands. SAS Institute, based in Cary, N.C., is a conspicuous example. The software giant, which copped Hall of Fame honors in 1986, now employs 7,000 people worldwide and reports revenues of $1 billion.
Not content to rest on have gone public. (See "Cruising to an IPO -- with Mixed Results.") And at least 13 Hall of Fame entrepreneurs have started additional companies. (See "Winning Mandate: An Encore.") But the long stretch of fast growth experienced by Hall of Fame companies hasn't relieved their CEOs of many commonplace entrepreneurial burdens. Forty-three percent of the survey's respondents bemoaned "bad hires," and 57% cited hiring as their most unexpected challenge to growth. "When you're fast growing, you don't take as much care with hiring as you should," says Ross Youngs, CEO of Univenture, a maker of CD storage products in Columbus, Ohio, that entered the Hall of Fame in 1997. "Now we don't take gambles. We have multiple eyes on any major candidate." Despite the nagging problem of recruiting qualified employees, Youngs predicts that Univenture's revenues will hit $25 million this year, up from $15 million just two years ago.
and professional services firm in McLean, Va., only aggravated its hiring woes, says former CEO and founder Satyendra "Shri" Shrivastava. In the mid-1990s, Anstec particularly struggled to find qualified marketing and finance managers, Shrivastava says. "It was very difficult, and we had to hire people who were second-best," he says. "But sometimes second-best didn't work out. We had some bad apples in finance." Shrivastava responded by training his son, Sumeet, to run Anstec, and the bad hires didn't last long. Shortly after Anstec made the Hall of Fame in 1995, its founder started a second company, Anstec Technologies, which provides E-business services. The moves paid off. Shrivastava sold Anstec in 1999 to a larger competitor, Keane Inc., which kept his son on as managing director of the Anstec unit. Meanwhile, $4-million Anstec Technologies is continuing to grow.
Yet another measure -- employee turnover -- shows that the Hall of Fame companies have struggled exceedingly with averaged 17% a year, according to the survey, compared with this year's Inc. 500 average of 15%. At some Hall of Fame companies, turnover is nothing short of horrific. John Fain, CEO of Metro Information Services, a six-time Inc. 500 veteran, says an average of 35% of the salaried consultants at his Virginia Beach, Va., **31;5597;TOOLONG company leave each year.
Almost half of the respondents to the Hall of Fame survey said they had stuck to their company's original mission, through thick and thin. A whopping 83% said they had achieved growth in the areas they'd anticipated it to come from -- many in computer-related fields, although traditional businesses like a travel agency, a restaurant chain, and a plastic-lawn-chair manufacturer are also represented in the Hall of Fame.
Asked about the biggest personal toll their company's fast growth had taken, half of the CEOs who answered said "family time." In fact 13% of them said that business pressures had led to a divorce Shawmut Design &; Construction, based in Boston, says that in 20 years he's suffered every conceivable entrepreneurial malady -- from bad hires to financing mishaps -- except divorce. "Although," he admits, "I came very close." Ansara's biggest challenge? "My inability to stay focused and maintain my intensity as I enter my forties has been an unexpected challenge," he says.
At least the CEOs are well compensated for their sacrifices. The median pay (including salary, profit sharing, and bonuses) of 18 Hall of Fame CEOs who answered the survey questions about compensation was $400,000, twice the comparable figure among this year's Inc. 500. Those 18 CEOs reported receiving an average raise of 95% over a five-year period.
Perhaps it's no surprise that one of the oldest and most successful companies in the Hall of Fame, SAS Institute, has been listed in The 100 Best Companies to Work for in America. The annual turnover rate at SAS: just above on-site day care and a 35-hour workweek. But the low turnover rate may also be related to the perseverance of company founder James Goodnight, who is still CEO after 24 years. Window on the Hall of Fame TABLE
SAS INSTITUTE CEO JAMES GOODNIGHT
SHAWMUT CEO JIM ANSARA
By Susan Greco

The chief executives of Inc. 500 staffing and human resources companies know how to sustain growth by morphing their business when demand shifts from one sector of the economy to another. Thinknicity, founded in 1997, made a quick transition from IT talent-scouting to the biotech and pharmaceutical staffing markets. Contract Recruiting, based in Palos Verdes Estates, Calif., steered clear of doing business with dot-commers altogether, and CEO Ladd Richland claims his $4.8 million outsourced recruiting company is better off for it. Others are using new technologies to hard-wire their growth. Both TruStar Solutions, a recruiting company based in Fishers, Ind., and Unicru, a recruiter of hourly workers based in Beaverton, Oreg., employ artificial-intelligence technology to help them sift through huge volumes of resums. Unicru, which recruits for Blockbuster and Universal Studios, is rolling out its in-store recruiting kiosk that uses the new technology to screen prospective job applicants for open positions -- and can alert management to a hot prospect within minutes. Jess McCuan
Heartlab abf Westerly, R.I. 2002 Revenue: $18.8 million Growth (1998-2002 99
This is Heartlab's fifth appearance on the Inc. 500 list. During that time, its digital systems have changed the way doctors store images of their patients' hearts. Its software and Web-based programs also allow physicians to keep track of their notes, patient prescriptions, and patient allergies. It's the Law: Hospitals are required to retain patient images for seven years. The Old Way: Before Heartlab, images made by X-ray machines and echocardiograms were typically stored on expensive workstations or 35mm film. Dream Team: CEO Robert Petrocelli, whose background is in physics and computer science, co-founded the company with cardiologist Dr. Jonathan Elion. They developed their imaging system in partnership with Hewlett-Packard's medical division. Future Projects: Heartlab is working on a system that would allow doctors to instantly access a patient's previously recorded heart image -- even if that image was stored at a distant hospital. Three-Year Goal: To reach $100 million in sales. Home Instead Senior Care h Omaha 2002 Revenue: $10.6 million 1994 Employees: 36
The company provides nonmedical home care services for the elderly, including companionship, housekeeping, meal preparation, errands, transportation, and medication reminders. It has 424 franchise offices nationwide and in Canada, Japan, and Portugal that employ about 22,000 people. But the founders still run the original Omaha branch and recently opened another in Fremont, Nebr. Thank Granny: In another life, CEO Paul Hogan (no relation to the crocodile hunter, mate) was a high-ranking executive at Merry Maids, a cleaning service franchiser. He got the idea for Home Instead after his 89-year-old grandmother became unable to care for herself. "Even though she had 51 grandchildren and 50 great-grandchildren, it took all of us to help," he says, recalling how he and his wife would drive her to the hairdresser and church. With the family's care, Hogan's grandmother lived to be over 100 years old. "I remember thinking,' How do people with smaller families do this have franchise offices in three more countries, and a total of 600 to 650 franchisees. Progressive Medical af Westerville, Ohio 2002 Revenue: $38.8 million Growth (1998-2002): 326% No. 492 Founded: 1986 Employees: 108
David Bianconi was working as the chief financial officer of a medical equipment company when he launched Progressive, a provider of workers' compensation services to insurance underwriters and case managers. Trial Period: In 1989, Progressive was close to collapse. Bianconi quit the CFO job and gave himself four months to turn Progressive around. "I told myself, 'During this period I will not second-guess myself. Even if no one I call will speak to me, and I have no success, this is what I will be doing, regardless,'" he recalls. After his four months were up, he'd made enough progress to start drawing a small salary. Molding the Company: Bianconi hires people he likes whether he has a job opening or not. "I've someone that I think can really contribute, we will change the direction of our strategic plan." TruStar Solutions c Fishers, Ind. 2002 Revenue: $10.5 million Growth (1998-2002): 3,379% No. 33 Founded: 1997 Employees: 22
Former Oakland A's outfielder LeRoy Robbins is CEO of this recruiting and consulting firm, which has attracted such clients as Procter &; Gamble, Dell, AT &T,; and Eli Lilly. Robbins's younger brother, Bruce, a pitcher for the Detroit Tigers in the ' 70s, founded the company and is now chairman of the board. When the Heat Is On: The elder Robbins says athletic competitiveness drives TruStar. "When it gets harder or hotter, you push through the barriers," he says. "Sports teaches you a tremendous respect for what a team can accomplish." Sweet Spot: TruStar's competitive advantage is its relationships with major online job boards. Monster.com, CareerBuilder.com, and Yahoo's Hot Jobs pay it for postings. It's also winnow huge volumes of resums down to the top 5% to 10% of candidates. Management Style: LeRoy Robbins, who spent his early corporate career wading through big-company bureaucracy at giants like PepsiCo and 3M, says: "I am absolutely on fire making decisions. You can decide today and move today; The Outsource Group bcfgh Walnut Creek, Calif. 2002 Revenue: $358.5 million Growth (1998-2002): 3,303% No. 35 Founded: 1997 Employees: 48
This Inc. 500 star topped last year's list with 54,330% growth. It's a PEO (professional employer organization), though it's now calling itself an EPO (employment process outsourcer). Either way, the company provides 50 different HR functions to more than 400 clients across the country. Kevin Grauman, the company's CEO and founder, says TOG is continuing to grow rapidly despite struggling with its technology platform. Three years ago it shelled out around $1.5 million for client-server software -- a PeopleSoft-type system -- and earlier this year the headaches with upgrades becoming beholden to this huge beast," he says, noting that every time the software company made modifications he had to hire an army of consultants to come in and retrain his staff. So in early 2003, he decided his company would develop its own Web-based system. New Converts: Grauman says the recent scuffle between Oracle and PeopleSoft actually helps his case because it's now easier to persuade big-name clients to convert to his company's software. The new system, Emportal, is simple and intuitive, he says, and it requires no training. He plans to start selling it in late 2003 to clients with as many as 10,000 employees. Synhrgy HR Technologies ef Houston 2002 Revenue: $48.3 million Growth (1998-2002): 2,978% No. 42 Founded: 1998 Employees: 382
CEO Dave Carlson spent his early career at the Lincolnshire, Ill., consulting giant Hewitt Associates, and he eventually helped Hewitt develop an outsourcing division. But he felt the company was sometimes inflexible and inefficient. In 1996, lined up, he quit Hewitt with the idea of starting his own company. He later hired away some of Hewitt's top managers. Today, Synhrgy provides full-service HR outsourcing to 18 of the largest corporations in America. Expensive Lesson: Never team up with a company whose corporate culture is wildly different from yours. Synhrgy's partnership with a software giant went sour within 12 months, and Carlson had to buy all his stock back. "Now I tend to only partner with businesses that have a true entrepreneurial spirit," he says. C &A; Industries bcfg Omaha 2002 Revenue: $184 million Growth (1998-2002): 1,538% No. 95 Founded: 1977 Employees: 258
This executive search and staffing firm talent-scout for medical, accounting, and engineering position for mainly midwestern clients. CEO Larry Courtnage says the growth strategy that paid off most for the company was to begin recruiting for temporary positions in a variety of industries. What He Missed: The IT revolution. Courtnage says it's a big regret $36.9 million Growth (1998-2002): 1,266% No. 125 Founded: 1997 Employees: 211
Blue Pumpkin CEO Doron Aspitz drew his idea for his software from his work in human resources for the Israeli military. His programs schedule, track, and evaluate employees, like those who work from home for JetBlue's customer call center. Leap of Faith: In his first year Aspitz realized one Thursday that he had no money for Friday's payroll. "I didn't sleep the whole night," he says. On Friday, he gave his five staffers the bad news. "You just speak from your heart -- people resonate with that." His did -- all remained and got paid the next week. Growth Strategy: "Invest in the first 20 people, and make sure they're the right ones, and it sort of becomes contagious."
"Invest in the first 20 people, and make sure they're the right ones, and it sort of becomes contagious." Doron, Va. 2002 Revenue: $7.6 million Growth (1998-2002): 1,191% No. 134 Founded: 1997 Employees: 69
A seven-year Army hitch, including combat in the first Gulf War, taught CEO Paul J. Somerville about integrity and perseverance. "When you say you're going to do something, you've got to do it. The Army pounded that into me," he says. After the service, he went on his "one and only job interview" with a software company. Five years later he left that business to start his own venture making software for online corporate education and training. Out of Pocket: Somerville and four employee shareholders funded the company's launch themselves. Bootstrapping "created a very different culture here," he says. "We're not a start-up anymore, but we still act like one -- and that's a lot of fun." Somerville says he has never lost a customer to another company. Human Capital bg Southfieid, Mich. 2002 Revenue: Founded: 1997 Employees: 23
Like other professional employer organizations (PEOs), Human Capital recruits screens, and interviews potential job candidates, and then oversees employees' payroll, benefits, and government compliance issues. On Line 1: CEO Scott Fritz says the company's top priority is customer service, and one way it shows it is that it doesn't have voice mail. "When you've got a name like' Human Capital,' you've got to have a human answering the phone," says Fritz. CPA Support: Fritz says one of the company's biggest assets is its good reputation among CPAs. He works to set up alliance networks with major CPA firms, and once a handful of CPAs are on board, they refer all their clients to Human Capital. "I basically learned that business owners trust their CPAs above almost any other adviser," he says. New York Staffing Services bce New York City 2002 Revenue: $5 million Growth (1998-2002): 997% Manhattan-based staffing firm provides temporary and permanent workers to JP Morgan Chase, Cornell Weill Medical Center, MetLife insurance company, and the New York City Fire Department. Power to the People: Michael Robinson, a progressive ex-Wall Street exec originally from the British Caribbean, thinks his company will continue to grow quickly, but he's steering away from major cities like Boston and Atlanta, where competitors have already saturated the markets, to smaller cities like Tampa, where his company has just opened a second office. Lesson Learned: A client once requested five "reasonably sane" individuals for a job the following day, and Robinson said, "Of course." ("My, answer then was always 'of course,'" he says.) But he called at least 60 people that afternoon, none of whom was available. Eager to please, Robinson sent three of his own employees to the job, and the client was not impressed. "I was a bit overzealous," he says honest about whether I can fill a job. "Co-Advantage Resources cfg Orlando 2002 Revenue: $231.9 million Growth (1998-2002): 914% No. 180 Founded: 1997 Employees: 100
Co-Advantage handles back-office tasks like payroll and compliance. CEO Dayne Williams considers the book Socratic Selling by Kevin Daley (which counsels asking questions to understand clients instead of pitching a product) to be a great tool. He also recommends the B-Alert plan offered in The Power of Focus by Jack Canfield. The plan has six steps: blueprint, action, learning, exercise, relaxation, think. Sports Center: Williams played fullback for the Florida State Seminoles from 1985-88 (the Deion years), and former teammates sit on his board. Also, one partner is the son of the Orlando Magic's founder; another is the son of the University of Cincinnati's athletic director. Softscape ce Wayland, Mass. 2002 Revenue: $9.9 million Growth (1998-2002): 807% No. 208 Founded: 1994 Employees: 85
Softscape was able, analyzing employee performance, and aligning workers' goals with company goals -- for the Internet from the start. That gave it a jump on competitors who had to transition customers from a client-server application model. Family Matter: The company was founded by CEO Hank Watkins and his sons Dave and Rick, who wrote their business plan on the back of a napkin and raised $50,000 in seed capital by selling a condo. What Weekend? Dave, who helps run the company, calculates that he works 115 hours a week. AdminSolutions cg Charlotte, N.C. 2002 Revenue: $64.7 million Growth (1998-2002): 725% No. 239 Founded: 1997 Employees: 25
David and Tom Moore founded this provider of HR services such as payroll, benefits, and workers' compensation claims. Their father, an HR expert, also helped launch the company but was bought out five years ago. "That was real tricky" David says with a laugh. Now they split ownership with a third partner, who breaks ties Gyms. Contract Recruiting bc Palos Verdes Estates, Calif. 2002 Revenue: $4.8 million Growth (1998-2002): 708% No. 245 Founded: 1998 Employees: 53
Ladd Richland co-founded this business with his wife, Julia Richland, who was then working as a contract recruiter for KB Home, a large homebuilder with operations in 10 states. Julie realized KB could be more efficient in its hiring of outside recruiting firms, so the couple set up a firm that catered to KB. It now places approximately 3,000 employees a year at companies that include GE, General Dynamics, AmGen, and H.J. Heinz. By the Hour: Ladd says one of the company's keys to success is charging an hourly fee for its work and not a placement fee. "We don't believe in contingency fees," he says. "It's like a bounty you put on each resum." Office Jig: When someone in the office lands a major deal, the staff does a "deal dance," which the funky chicken." Unicru f Beaverton, Oreg. 2002 Revenue: $21.1 million Growth (1998-2002): 682% No. 260 Founded: 1987 Employees: 136
You've probably seen something from Unicru at your local Blockbuster, but it's not for rent. It's an in-store kiosk -- an Internet-equipped workstation where prospective job applicants can sign up for open positions. Part of the application process includes an IQ test and a personality test, which asks if applicants agree or disagree with statements like "You can wait patiently for a long time" or "You do not fake being polite." If an applicant seems like an exceptional match, Unicru sends a cellphone signal to the supervisor, who snatches up the applicant within minutes. Its Own Medicine: Unicru subjects all employees to rigorous personality and intelligence tests. "As an exec, it's about 800 questions," says Chris Marsh, who went through the tests when he joined the company as CEO in 2001. AccuForce Staffing Services bc Kingsport): 653% No. 270 Founded: 1997 Employees: 28
AccuForce provides medium to large manufacturing companies with temporary staffing services. How It Grew: "We are built on gaining a customer, keeping it, and adding a new one," says CEO Larry Nunley. Eighty percent of AccuForce's 1998 customers have signed on again in 2003. Loyalty Management: Nunley believes that retaining full-time employees, especially competent, positive branch managers, helps AccuForce win customer loyalty. Thinknicity San Francisco 2002 Revenue: $8 million Growth (1998-2002): 653% No. 271 Founded: 1997 Employees: 11
Thinknicity headhunts everyone from top IT project managers and biostatisticians to lab assistants and help-desk employees. The odd moniker fits this progressive firm, founded by three female executives who originally called themselves Trilogy Information Technology. Co-founder Dyana King says that by 2001 the company was looking for a name that was more "funky-fresh." Secret to Success: All job applicants get a personal phone call or e-mail explaining why they did or -- that's what makes us different," says King. Zodiac Zone: At lunchtime this mostly female crew sits around a table while co-founder Helga Grayson, the company finance whiz, reads everyone's horoscope and conducts a current-events quiz. Three o'clock is cake time when it's anyone's birthday, and on weekends there are staff bowling and karaoke nights. What Gives: Employees get one day off a month to volunteer for a cause of their choice. CareerStaff bci Irvine, Calif. 2002 Revenue: $3.1 million Growth (1998-2002): 623% No. 286 Founded: 1989 Employees: 12
CareerStaff was the third start-up for Larry Castro. Music Man: The first was a women's clothing company; the second was a fundraising business for local high school bands. Switcheroo: CareerStaff initially focused on recruiting mostly temporary workers for light-industrial companies, but in 1999, when a handful of the company's bread-and-butter industrial accounts fell through, Castro shifted his focus to the higher-margin clerical and office markets, and his a major goal, they ring a gigantic ship's bell. Employees Only b Troy, Mich. 2002 Revenue: $50.6 million Growth (1998-2002): 613% No. 290 Founded: 1994 Employees: 16
Mario Apruzzese, a self-described "bean counter gone crazy," started his career as a PricewaterhouseCoopers accountant, became a CFO for a $20 million potato chip manufacturer, and then, in a flurry of entrepreneurial activity in the early' 90s, founded three companies, the last of which was Employees Only. Final Answer? Apruzzese's favorite team-building activity is a Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? -type quiz game that he retitled "Get Out of My Office" (Apruzzese plays Regis; the prize is a vacation.) Best Move: Giving up control of day-to-day operations to a COO. "We really flourished when I got out of the way," he says. "I had to realize what I was good at and what I wasn't," Pearl of Wisdom: Never ask better luck settling sticky issues like breaking up with a business partner by talking things out in person with no lawyers present. Bolt Staffing Service c Vallejo, Calif. 2002 Revenue: $2.4 million Growth (1998-2002): 490% No. 364 Founded: 1994 Employees: 7
Joanne Sanders founded this business in 1994 in Pocatello, Idaho, with $600, the left-over security deposit from a house she'd rented. She began rounding up business by interviewing temporary workers in libraries and pizza parlors. She compensated her first employee -- a 19-year-old woman she once babysat for in college -- with free lodging and use of her personal car. By 1996, Sanders had lucrative contracts with Lockheed Martin and Argonne National Laboratory. In 1998, she and her husband, Morgan, moved the business to Vallejo, Calif. Sanders and her staff now specialize in finding full-time and temporary employees for clients ranging from Sonoma wineries to Bay Area oil refineries. Tilson HR cfg Greenwood, Ind. 2002 Revenue: $74.4 million Growth (1998-2002)
CEO Brent Tilson says he struggled to get the company off the ground in its first year, but then read Michael Gerber's E-Myth. The self-help book for small business inspired him to seek knowledgeable partners. So he sold 15% of his business to a publicly traded staffing company based in Indianapolis. The high-profile (for Greenwood) deal brought media attention and phone calls from Wall Street analysts. Bake Sale: This summer, the company had four men and 18 women in its office, and Tilson swears every one of the women can cook. "They like to show off," he says. (The men may all soon need to buy roomier cars.) Authoria f Waltham, Mass. 2002 Revenue: $24.4 million Growth (1998-2002): 482% No. 367 Founded: 1997 Employees: 130
Authoria's HR intranet software integrates workers' personal data with companies' benefits and policies, allowing employees to get information 24-7. Because Authoria's products also integrate with those of enterprise-software giants SAP, ("It's hard to get those three to agree on anything," notes Authoria CEO Tod Loofbourrow.) That's helped Authoria win large customers like Wells Fargo, Motorola, and Pfizer. Beyond Human: Loofbourrow used to build robots as a child, and taught graduate courses in artificial intelligence at Harvard. Integrity Staffing Solutions f Newark, Del. 2002 Revenue: $31.2 million Growth (1998-2002): 470% No. 379 Founded: 1997 Employees: 93
This six-year-old staffing firm provides temporary and permanent workers to Amazon.com, JP Morgan Chase, and H.J. Heinz, among others. The company was co-founded by Todd Bavol, who calls himself the "accidental entrepreneur," and Sean Montgomery, "the entrepreneur in denial." Their edge: a purely Web-based software system that lets managers get real-time access to reports about their employees. On the Level: The company was No. 2 on last year's Inc. 500. Mamma Mia: The co-founders pride themselves on being in tune with their employees' life down payment on a home; he helped another start her own business (an offshoot of Integrity); and, after a dispute with an insurance company, he paid for one employee's in vitro fertilization and she's now the mother of twins. "We don't lose touch with what people's dreams are," says Bavol. (His own dream is to start a rescue ranch for dogs that can be used in elder-care facilities.) The Flip Side: The co-founders once had an employee steal $12,000 from them, and, in their second year of business, a client who later went bankrupt left Integrity with an unpaid bill of $170,000. Savela &; Associates f Birmingham, Ala. 2002 Revenue: $5.4 million Growth (1998-2002): 405% No. 426 Founded: 1996 Employees: 20
CEO Ed Savela, a CPA and a former controller, says he had been considering starting his own staffing business but was afraid to leave his job at a national company because his son had serious health. When Congress passed the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, which allows employees to keep their health insurance when they change or leave jobs, he was able to become an entrepreneur. Staff One f Woodridge, Ill. 2002 Revenue: $20.1 million Growth (1998-2002): 386% No. 439 Founded: 1997 Employees: 23
Richard Seeman left his job at a Chicago-area temp firm believing he could gain a competitive advantage simply by giving temporary workers fair and reliable treatment. The Right Way: Seeman now has approximately 7,200 temporary employees in the field. "We don't stiff them on their holiday pay and checks," he explains. JC Malone Associates cdf Louisville 2002 Revenue: $19.8 million Growth (1998-2002): 348% No. 467 Founded: 1971 Employees: 40
The company uses a recruiting tool called the Predictive Index, a test the military developed in the ' 50s for recruiting fighter pilots, to analyze both its own employees and potential employees for placements. Most Important Customer: UPS., Terry and Tim. He also hired a 79-year-old aunt, a retired nun, to answer phones to help collect past-due bills. "We figure it's hard to say no to a nun," Terry jokes. The Career Control Group cf Dallas 2002 Revenue: $12.3 million Growth (1998-2002): 329% No. 485 Founded: 1985 Employees: 50
Founder Dr. Donald Hanratty, whose company provides career management services to corporations, coined the term "career continuation." While traditional outplacement helps laid-off employees find new jobs for a limited period of time, CCG helps individuals identify their strengths and options indefinitely. This can lead to retraining for another career, relocation within the same company, or becoming an entrepreneur. Berks &; Beyond Employment Services West Reading, Pa. 2002 Revenue: $5.2 million Growth (1998-2002): 312% No. 500 Founded: 1998 Employees: 11
CEO Chris Garner was frustrated in his previous job as HR manager for a local company. "I was way too aggressive for them his house and started his own staffing company, Berks &; Beyond, with $150 in the bank. For the first few months, his brother and father (who also remortgaged his house to help fund the business) worked for free. Bottoms Up: Garner eventually bought a local grocery store and started the Kog Hill Winery, which makes wine from Pennsylvania grapes, with two neighbors. ICON KEY TABLE Finicky Financing
A business plan may be brilliant, but getting start-up capital is still a challenge. As usual, the majority of this year's Inc. 500 companies were launched using the founders' personal assets, loans, or funds from friends and family. However, a few crafty Inc. 500 founders secured cash elsewhere. Some Asked the man upstairs. Scott Pipitone, founder of Scott Pipitone Design (page 26), was lucky enough to have a neighbor with more than a handy pantry. The upstairs tenant, an IBM salesman, lent him $10,000. (Pipitone used some of the money to scant $1,500 credit line and deeply in debt with student loans, Jeanne Battaglia-Dillon, founder of Managed Care Network (page 66), and husband Stephen moved into the attic and rented their three-story home to five college students. For four years, their young tenants supported the growth of the company. And Dean Soil, president of SubZero Constructors (page 102), credits frequent-flier miles with getting his company off the ground. With no money to start his business, he turned in his miles for a first-class ticket to Atlanta, adopted a "think big, act big" attitude, and landed a $1 million contract with a large former client from a previous job. The $100,000 down payment was enough to get started. BOBBIE GOSSAGE
Night-table necessities
Even busy Inc. 500 CEOs find time to read. These volumes were particularly helpful: The Great Game of Business by Jack Stack. "Benchmarking, open-book management, cross-training, and countless other' common' principles used in great companies but alien to of dentistry thanks to these principles," says Rick Workman, Heartland Dental Care (page 70). Socratic Selling by Kevin Daley and The Power of Focus by Jack Canfield are recommended by Dayne Williams, Co-Advantage Resources (page 73). The Ecology of Commerce by Paul Hawken "makes a strong point that companies look at the bottom line and short-term financial results, while completely disregarding the untold damage to our environment," says Jeff Weltzin, Juxtamark (page 29). Mastering the Rockefeller Habits: What You Must Do to Increase the Value of Your Fast-Growth Firm by Verne Harnish. "It taught us to set shorter term targets and what Harnish calls a BHAG, or big hairy audacious goal. It has really kept us growing at astounding rates," says Jeffrey Rogers, Kaizen Direct (page 28). MATTHEW FOGEL
Who's keeping the books? TABLE Online, and the top line: E-commerce and Web-based procurement are deemed important by fewer than half of the Inc. 500. TABLE (COLOR): Human Capital's assets
PHOTO (COLOR): Ed Savela
By Jess McCuan; Bobbie Gossage and Matthew Fogel
Section: THE MCDONALD'S OF FITNESS His goal: To single-handedly save the world's women from obesity. With Curves, he seems to be pulling it off. And he's built a billion-dollar business along the way
It's just after 9 in the morning, and 375 people, nearly all of them women, sit at rows of tables in quiet anticipation. In front of each is a bottle of water, a thick loose-leaf binder, and a paper tent printed with their names and hometowns: Boynton Beach, Florida; Kodiak, Alaska; Libby, Montana; Traralgon, Australia; Martha's Vineyard; San Diego.
The room's walls are draped with large boxing match posters -- promoting contests like Iron Will vs. Evil Sofa, and Will Power vs. Curly Fries. A large neon sign of the logo for the women's fitness club Curves -- the company name, in purple cursive -- is mounted on the wall, casting a violet glow on the white metal weight machines that occupy a pride of place not only in of communities across the United States and, increasingly, the world.
The event is called Club Camp, and each new franchisee of the fast-growing chain of gyms is required to attend. There are enough new franchisees that the company holds a Club Camp almost every month, including sessions in places like Sydney and Tokyo to accommodate the gym's growing number of global franchisees. Janell Gilman, Curves' director of training, is first to take the stage. She delivers a few housekeeping remarks, then introduces the main event. "Get ready to welcome the man who has made this all possible, our CEO and founder, Gary Heavin!" A sea of pastel T-shirts and ponytails rise as one, applauding, cheering, flashing disposable and digital cameras. Some of the franchisees wipe tears from their eyes, others execute a little dance.
Heavin takes the stage, smiling and waving. A 51-year-old Texan with sandy, thinning hair and a blondish dose-clipped mustache, he's wearing a lavender shirt slacks. He's not pudgy, but he's no hard-bodied Jack La Lanne either. He casually leans on a tall chair and begins. "We're going to make you masters of your own fate," Heavin (pronounced haven) tells the crowd. "I'm going to tell you exactly what this job requires to be successful. If you follow my advice exactly, you will prosper. You can't screw this up! But if you want to do it your own way, you're going to have problems. This is an opportunity. People thank me for that opportunity, frequently. But I always say,' Look, all I did was figure out every wrong way to do this. ' I've lost everything I owned, and that's good news for you, because you don't have to suffer and learn things the hard way. I've done it for you."
SINCE ITS FOUNDING 14 years ago, Curves has grown from one franchise to every 10 franchised fitness facilities in the United States, making it the nation's largest fitness chain. Curves can be found in 44 countries, and it's the largest fitness chain in Canada, Ireland, Mexico, and New Zealand. There are four million Curves members worldwide. Curves International, the franchiser, is privately held and family-owned, and employs just over 100 people at its headquarters in Woodway, Texas, a suburb of Waco. The company says it now has systemwide revenue in excess of $1 billion.
But Curves, Heavin insists, is about more than just money. "I personally can't influence the lives of women. I can't get them to go to the gym, watch their weight, and take care of themselves," he tells the crowd at Club Camp. "But me and 10,000 of you, and the 30,000 employees you'll hire? Together we can. In fact, I'll share something with you that came out this past week." American Medical Association. Between 2000 and 2004, the survey found, the percentage of men that are obese increased, as did the percentage of children. But the percentage of women who are obese -- 33 percent -- remained flat. "I believe that Curves has single-handedly stopped the obesity rate in this country for women," he says. The room explodes with wild applause.
It's hard to say whether Heavin is correct, but his claim is at least plausible. Experts say that Curves, which has persuaded millions of otherwise sedentary women to get to the gym, deserves some credit for making a dent in the obesity crisis. "Curves has arguably done more to get inactive women exercising than any other fitness trend or organization in the history of exercise," concluded a 2005 report from the American Council on Exercise. Given that, and given the company's rapid growth, it's also hard not to take Heavin seriously when he says that his goal for Curves is to become "as audacious as it sounds. Already, there is one Curves for every two McDonald's in the United States.
Curves gyms can be found in mini-malls and on country roads, in urban centers and suburban shopping plazas. Walk into a typical club, pass an appointment desk, and you'll see a dozen workout machines arranged in a circle. The machines use hydraulic resistance instead of stacked weights, so the faster you work, the heavier the resistance. The idea is to work fast enough to elevate your heart rate into the training zone. Every 30 seconds, the fast-paced music that pumps through the club's sound system is interrupted by a voice that instructs "change stations now." You move from a resistance machine to a "recovery station," where you are encouraged to "move lively" to keep your heart rate elevated. Walk, jog in place, or do a little dance, as most do. In the center of the circuit, a Curves employee encourages and to septuagenarians -- chat about their lives, their kids, their upcoming vacations. There are no mirrors and no men. Go around the circuit twice, and you're done. It takes just 30 minutes. Membership starts at $29 a month.
Circuit training, of course, has been around for decades. But Curves is very much unlike most fully loaded gyms with their banks of cardio machines, schedules of aerobics classes, personal trainers, spa services, juice bars, and other assorted bells and whistles. Indeed, the idea for Curves emerged from Heavin's experience running a traditional gym -- and then running it into the ground.
As a child growing up in the mid-1960s, Heavin dreamed of becoming a doctor. After graduating from Sam Houston High School in Arlington, Texas, Heavin worked a variety of odd jobs -- a roughneck on oil rigs, longshoreman, waiter, truck driver -- while taking premed classes in colleges. His dream ended around the same time he ran out of David had a proposal: Would Gary like to manage a fitness center he was planning to purchase in Houston? With little to lose, Heavin went for it.
He was 20 years old and knew nothing about business, and the first year of running the gym was often terrifying. Heavin struggled to find money to pay the gym's electricity bill and often spent his nights on the floor of the facility's daycare center. But in the process, he learned a few things about himself. First, he loved the fitness business. Plus, he was a good salesperson, particularly when it came to dealing with women. He soon limited the gym's membership to women only and named it Women's World of Fitness.
Within a year, the club was doing well enough that the brothers decided to open another location. Over the next six years, they opened another six more throughout south Texas. "By the time I was 26, I had a $1 million financial statement,, Women's World of Fitness had 14 locations and 50,000 members. Heavin got a pilot's license and flew himself from location to location, keeping an eye on his growing empire. Then things started to fall apart.
In retrospect, the problems were simple. "I let my overhead increase beyond the capacity of the market," Heavin says. Women's World of Fitness clubs were big, which meant high rents. They also offered swimming pools, tanning beds, and kids' programs. Such costly amenities require a large membership base, but aside from Houston, the gyms were mostly in smaller towns. Desperate to bring in more money, Heavin decided to open his clubs to men. "It was logical, but it destroyed my women's business," he says. Indeed, it didn't take long for female customers to grow uncomfortable with the meat-market aspect of a coed gym and drift away. As the business faltered, Heavin's managers grew restless. "I spent keep people disciplined and motivated," Heavin says.
In 1986, about three years after opening its 14th location, Women's World of Fitness was bankrupt. Heavin lost his house, his airplane, and his cars, and was some $5 million dollars in debt. His wife divorced him. Heavin lacked the money to pay alimony and in short order went from being a jet-setting entrepreneur to just another broke guy serving a three-month term in Cameron County Jail in Brownsville. As often happens when people hit bottom, Heavin turned to the Bible for solace. He described the moment he became born again during a 2003 interview on Pat Robertson's The 700 Club. "I finally got on my knees and said, 'God, I lived the first half of my life by my will, and it's a mess. I'm going to turn the rest of my life over to you.'" His religious beliefs gave him a new way to look at his mistakes -- not as failures the Lord's larger plan for Gary Heavin.
Heavin began putting his life back together. He found work selling fitness equipment and consulting with gym owners and settled into life with a new wife. Heavin met Diane Piller during the waning days of his gym business. Diane, who had model-perfect features and the physique of a lifelong fitness fanatic, worked in newspaper advertising. Women's World of Fitness was not only one of her accounts, it was also the place she went to get her aerobics fix. The relationship grew as the business collapsed, and in 1990, the couple married, just before Gary went to jail. "It's kind of a neat thing that we married then because he knew I really loved him," she says. "He didn't have a lot of material things."
The couple soon began plotting their return to the fitness business. Their new gym would be different. Overhead would be kept as low as possible. Rather than investing in every simple fitness circuit that would be quick and easy for members to complete. Instead of operating as dose to 24-7 as possible, a common practice in the industry, the gym would close early. Showers, de rigueur at most gyms, were also deemed expendable. And most important of all: It would be women only. Diane came up with the name -- Curves -- and sketched out a cursive logo on a piece of paper.
If everything worked out, the Heavins figured they'd be able to earn about $100,000 a year. With $10,000 they'd managed to scrape together, they opened the first Curves in 1992 in Harlingen, Texas, where they lived, with Diane as manager. It was immediately clear that the simple formula would work. The couple had estimated it would take 90 days to sell 100 memberships -- the amount they'd need to break even. Diane sold that amount in the first week alone. In 1994, they opened a second club in McAllen, and it from his jailhouse religious awakening, the newfound success made perfect sense. "It's kind of like Moses in the Bible," he says. "I spent 10 years in Egypt, which was the old health club business. And then I spent 10 years in the desert; I was a consultant, I was in the equipment business, I traveled around. And then at age 40, it all just came together. Everything we tried, worked. We entered into the Promised Land."
By 1995, the Heavins had far exceeded their wildest dreams. "We had two Curves, a brand-new baby, and we were earning a quarter of a million a year," says Gary. "We were going to live happily ever after." Then he had an epiphany.
Heavin was giving a talk on weight management to a group of women when he realized heft been scanning the crowd for the face of his mother, who had died when he was 13. He says. "My two little brothers and I found her. It was a real traumatic experience." Doris Joy Heavin had suffered from obesity, high blood pressure, and depression, all of which were treated with medication rather than the recommendation that she get more exercise. Heavin grew furious when he thought about it. Perhaps this explained why he wanted to be a doctor, why he enjoyed the fitness business so much. "I had the epiphany that what my life had been about was healing women because of my mother," he says. "And that was what my destiny was going to be."
Heavin would heal women before they got sick. Curves would be the vehicle, and he needed to spread it as far and wide as possible. The question was how to do it. He didn't want to expand by opening more gyms and trusting strangers to manage them; managers, he felt, had served him poorly at Women's World of Fitness he told his wife. Diane, who had come to enjoy her new lifestyle, thought the move was way too risky. "I didn't feel like eating beans again," she says.
Gary understood her fears, but pressed his case. Franchising, he said, made perfect business sense. "I believe you can teach a manager to care enough to make a pretty good cup of coffee," Heavin says. "But it's hard to make a manager care enough to run a fitness club. Only an owner will care enough to do the job." There were spiritual concerns, as well. "We've been given this gift and if we don't use it, it will be taken away," he told Diane. He reminded her that they were required to use the gifts they had been given and to bless others as they'd been blessed.
After sleeping on it, Diane came around. "Okay," she asked, "how a thing about franchising. Heavin turned to an acquaintance, Gary Findley, for advice. Findley was vice president of franchise sales at the Dwyer Group, a well-established franchiser of residential services such as Mr. Rooter, Glass Doctor, and others, and was a fount of information. Heavin ran a $250 ad in The Paris News in Paris, Texas, and quickly sold his first franchise. After he sold his third franchise, Heavin called Findley. "I've got a little money coming in now," he said, "and I can pay you to come onboard." Findley became Curves' first employee and was soon named president.
The early days of Curves were far from glamorous. Using Heavin's pickup truck and an open-bed trailer, the two Garys would bring equipment to franchisees. They'd scrape bugs off the machines before delivering them, and always carried white spray paint to cover up the dings and scratches that cropped up during transport. Diane created marketing and training materials. bottles with the company's logo. When the company decided to create a glossy magazine for members, Heavin named it Diane.
From the outset, Heavin was looking for a different kind of franchisee -- someone who was looking less for a business opportunity than for a mission. The typical franchiser, he says," looks for people. who want to run a business and tries to teach them passion. We're looking for people with passion, and we'll teach them how to run a business. "So rather than plastering the franchise trades with ads like most franchisers, Curves has found nearly all of its franchisees through word of mouth -- as often as not from its own membership base. Many share Heavin's Christian faith. Franchisees are not required to have any background in entrepreneurship or experience in the fitness industry, but Heavin says that the company is selective: Applicants must display a willingness to work hard and, more important, have a passion to serve.
Amy and Randy. Amy joined a Curves gym and now the couple, who are married, own one in Batesville, Arkansas. "We like Gary's philosophy," says Randy, "and we like the idea that it's for women's health." Adds Amy: "With Curves, you're one-on-one with people. At Subway, you do have your regular people that come in and out, but you're not affecting their health, and that's really motivating to me, to be able to help other ladies like that."
The Simses also like the way Curves handles financial matters. In most franchising arrangements, franchisees pay the franchiser a franchise fee at the outset (at Curves, the current fee is $39,900; opening a Subway franchise, by comparison; can cost more than double that amount), plus a percentage of sales, on a weekly or monthly basis. That's how it worked at the Simses' Subway franchises. "The more you make, the more very, very frustrating. Your hard work is paying off and you're making money, but you're also giving a lot of it to them." To Heavin, this made no sense. Not only does it serve as a kind of tax on successful franchisees, it creates bad blood between the franchisee and franchiser. "You tend to become adversaries over the issue," Heavin says. He decided to cap the monthly 5 percent royalty -- it's currently $795 in the United States. "If they do fantastic, bless 'em," Heavin says.
Of course, the cap limits the income that Curves International stands to get from franchisees. On the other hand, dubs that outgrow the royalty cap still provide additional revenue to Curves through product sales. Franchisees are required to purchase all of their Curves T-shirts, water bottles, vitamin supplements, and so on from Curves; such products currently are a $25 million-a-year business. (That business, a separate company called Ideas in's more, the royalty cap made it a cinch to attract new franchisees. "The more money our franchisees would make, the happier they were, and they'd shout about it," Heavin says.
And shout they did. In 1996, there were 44 Curves gyms. In 1997, there were 247. The Heavins decided to move their headquarters from their home to a proper office. They rented two offices and soon added a third. The next year, the number of Curves franchises doubled again, to 537, and the Heavins moved Curves headquarters from Harlingen to Waco, to a low-slung building across the street from a waste-treatment facility. They had five employees and never thought they'd outgrow that building. In 2000, there were more than 1,200 franchises. In 2001, Curves doubled in size again. By 2004, the company had more than 8,000 franchises, and Curves moved again, to its current capacious headquarters: a rustic, ranchlike building in Woodway, with working fireplaces cowboys taking aim at Indians.
Heavin credits Curves' rapid growth to the low-overhead business model, which allows the company to open profitably in towns too small for other gyms. "We created an efficient business model that could go where no one else could," he says. Indeed, the average Curves club today has only 400 members -- which, according to a formula the company has developed, is what a town with a population of about 10,000 can sustain.
Targeting smaller towns and cities had several strategic advantages. For one thing, it made it easier to attract members, because Curves often was the only fitness option in town. It also made it easier to attract new franchisees: The territories were small enough that an enthusiastic Curves member could open a gym one or two towns over without poaching business. The low-overhead model also meant that the buy-in for a franchisee wasn't steep -- a little under $20,000 in those days, including the equipment. And franchising in out-of-the-way places gave largely hidden from rivals, which allowed the company to sell hundreds of franchises without arousing competition.
Marketing also proved easy. Curves promised a fast-yet-effective workout, along with a sense of community with like-minded women. This promise was particularly attractive during the mid- to late 1990s. Aging boomers were being urged by their doctors to spend more time at the gym. But few women are able to put this advice into practice: Some 66 percent of women say they never get 10 minutes or more of any kind of vigorous physical activity a week, according to a 2004 report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. What's more, Heavin's frank talk about religiously inspired values could not have been timed better. Not only were megachurches on the rise, but the family-friendly aspect of Curves ownership -- hours that allow you to be home to have dinner with your family -- also had a strong appeal and stood in stark contrast with the around-the-clock service required by other franchisers.
To be sure,, for example, news broke that the Heavins had given generously to an anti-abortion group, sparking a moral dilemma for many pro-choice Curves members. The issue even surfaced in The New York Times Magazine's column The Ethicist. The column's author, Randy Cohen, suggested that pro-choice Curves members who value their reproductive rights more than their figures should relinquish their memberships. Very few members actually left, however, and Curves continued its rapid growth. The numbers are indisputable. "It took McDonald's 25 years to reach 6,000 locations. It took Subway 26 years," says Heavin. "And it took us eight."
Back at Club Camp, Heavin wraps up his remarks and opens the floor to questions from the franchisees. How can I inspire teamwork among my employees, one wants to know. Will Curves authorize a price increase anytime soon, asks another. Then Heavin gets this question from a franchisee in Colorado: "Hi, Gary. I know what you do for women is any testing in consumer markets? I've been asked this question by my own members."
"Here's the answer so you can tell your members," Heavin replies. "When hell freezes over." Raising his voice to be heard over the applause and cheers, he explains himself. "Compared with women, men don't seem to be that loyal. For five bucks off the dues, he's going to go down the street. Also, in a gym environment, men don't bring their friends. When you're sitting at a table with several people, does Bob get up and say,' Come on, Jim and John, let's go the bathroom together? ' Men don't work that way." After the laughter dies down, Heavin turns somber. "The men's fitness business is a terrible place to go -- and I've been there, by the way. Will the Curves equipment and physiology work for men? Sure. Would constantly to do this. Maybe someone else will figure out a smart way to do it. But we're going to take care of the women? He gets another robust round of applause.
Some CEOs might at least take a moment to consider a brand extension idea offered repeatedly by franchisees and customers. But not Heavin. "When it comes to women's fitness, just by sheer numbers, I'm the world's undisputed expert. I'm the visionary," he says. "we certainly get a lot of good ideas from members and franchisees. But the big ideas, they come primarily from me." He points to this fact: Of the nearly 10,000 Curves locations that have opened, only 300 have closed. Of those, 200 have reopened successfully.
The question, of course, is whether Heavin's faith in his own judgment, and the credence he puts in lessons learned from past mistakes, will continue to suffice as Curves makes the transition from a fast-growing not everybody thinks so. Gary Findley, for example, began suggesting to Heavin that with growth slowing -- the chain now opens about 1,000 new franchises a year -- the company needed to begin opening complementary businesses under the Curves umbrella. "In order for Curves to maintain its spot ahead of the competition, it needs to provide some additional income opportunities for franchisees," he says. "At some point, they're going to reach their maximum income potential." Heavin, on the other hand, was adamant about keeping the focus squarely on 30-minute circuit training for women. Indeed, new franchisees are warned that if they deviate at all -- by adding, say, treadmills or tanning beds to their clubs -- they'll be in violation of their franchise agreements and run the risk of losing their businesses.
In 2004, at the age of 43, Findley retired. His plan was to devote his time to a ministry for men, centered around hunting. But the retirement didn't last who noticed that a day spa next to her club was doing brisk business with her members. Intrigued, he decided to invest in a membership-based day spa called Facelogic, which has sold 29 locations in less than a year. It's hard not to notice that this easily could have happened under the Curves umbrella. Findley remains close with Heavin and his sister-in-law still holds an executive position at Curves. But he thinks that Heavin's focus on what's worked for Curves in the past may impede the chain's future growth.
Heavin sees little reason to change course. Of the 41 franchise systems in the adult fitness sector, Curves boasts a 40 percent market share. But 10 newcomers have emerged in the past two years -- a large number of newcomers, says Darrell Johnson, president of FRANdata, a franchise research consultancy in Arlington, Virginia. None of these newbies are likely to knock Curves off its perch, says Johnson. But collectively, they threaten to whittle away at the leader's these new franchisers are slicing the market into ever smaller segments, appealing to upscale women, or women over 50, or younger women. "The fitness segment has moved from a one-size-fits-all model to a very specialized model," Johnson says.
Consider Cuts, a 30-minute fitness franchise for men that recently launched Cuts Women. Many Cuts Women customers are former Curves members who are sold on the idea of a 30-minute workout but are bored with Curves' routine and want something more intense, says John Gennaro, founder of the franchise, Which is based in Clark, New Jersey. With 90 locations and 15,000 members, Cuts is puny compared with Curves. But that doesn't bother Gennaro. He's happy to let Curves educate women about 30-minute fitness -- and even happier to provide an alternative when they grow restless.
Maturity has created other problems, as well. There are very few new territories available in the United States, so most new domestic franchisees are those who have purchased an existing. The average new club today costs about $40,000; a resale, $120,000, and many new franchisees wind up borrowing heavily. Curves recently created a department dedicated to the specific issues that crop up during the resale experience, but there are other operational issues to confront. The company has a ways to go before it truly can be considered the McDonald's of fitness, admits Mike Raymond, the company's former director of marketing, who became president after Findley stepped down. "McDonald's has a well-defined management structure, well-defined methods of operation in different countries, with levels of autonomy worked out, and information technology systems," he says. "We're working toward that now."
If any of this concerns Heavin, you'd be hard-pressed to notice. As confident as ever, he splits his time between his office and the new 6,000-square-foot home he and Diane just built. It's on a 1,000-acre, tree-studded ranch in Crawford, not far from President Bush's spread. Rustically "it has two kitchens and plenty of plush, oversize furniture. Out of sight from the main house are the smaller homes of many in the Heavins' extended family. Gary's brother Paul lives in one. Three others are occupied by Diane's parents; her sister and niece; and her brother and his family. Like many large-scale compounds in the area, the ranch has a name: Almost Heaven. The couple belong to two nearby churches, Highland Baptist Church in Waco and Mound Cowboy Church in Gatesville, and are active in a number of philanthropic efforts.
Heavin plans to expand Curves in two ways. The first is through a weight-management plan, the Curves 6 Week Solution, which is designed to appeal to women who prefer dieting to exercise. The six-week course costs $69 and is taught by franchisees. The idea is to expose the dieters to the Curves workout during their weekly classes, which will be held right in the club itself. Heavin also is developing partnerships with health community in the United States. As a result, Heavin says, the company is an ideal partner for insurers, which have begun boosting their wellness programs, including offering policyholders rebates if they regularly attend a gym. Heavin estimates that eight million Americans are eligible to have some or all of their Curves memberships paid for by their health insurance. If even a fraction of those millions sign up, it could represent an enormous opportunity.
And if it doesn't? Sitting in his office with his cowboy boots up on his desk, Heavin says this: "For a lot of people in my position, the position defines who they are. For me, I was as happy flat broke as I am flying my Learjet. I don't define myself by my quarterly profits. I define myself as a child of God that's been created in His image for eternity. If that becomes your defining image, there's extraordinary power in it." He pauses for a minute. "I; I'm going to wake up every day and do the right thing. And if I were to lose everything I own, I'd just rebuild again." 10 Questions for Gary Heavin
What's your favorite part of a typical day? My favorite part of the day is when I wake up. I get my priorities in order by praying and reading my Bible. It reminds me of what's really important.
What's the least glamorous thing you do regularly in the line of duty? Dealing with all the problems that rise to the top. They're usually simple misunderstandings that require my intervention. I apologize a lot.
What skill would you most like to improve? Praising people.
What makes for a good salesperson of your product?. Passion, personality, and pride. They must truly believe in what we are doing. They must enjoy people, and they must take pride in their work and do it well.
If you could go back, what would it be? I would go back and say "I" and "me" less, and "us" and "we" more.
What part of your job would you gladly give up? Accounting.
What's the simplest thing you never learned to do? Laundry.
Who's the smartest person you know? (And why?) That's tough because we are all smart in different ways; I don't know anyone who is smart in more than a few areas. President Bush has extraordinary people skills. Zig Ziglar understands motivation brilliantly. Pat Robertson understands faith and obedience. I know each of them and they are very smart men.
Who gives you the best advice about your business? Diane, my wife.
What keeps you up at night?. I can not think about work after 6 p.m.; if I do, I'm up all night, so I don't, ever.
Almost Heaven Gary Heavin opened Diana, managed it. He now has 9,901 Curves.
Happy Campers Every month, new franchisees attend Curves' Club Camp. "You don't have to suffer and learn the hard way," Heavin told a recent gathering in Waco. "I've done it for you."
No Frills Overhead at Curves is kept as low as possible. Even showers are deemed expendable.
Back at the Ranch Heavin drives a new Corvette, pilots a Learjet 60, and lives a stone's throw from President Bush.
By Alison Stein Wellner
Photographs by Beth Perkins

Contributing editor Alison Stein Wellner wrote for the June issue about the art of apologizing.
The Passion shows the power of religious messages, while churchgoing stars open up about their own beliefs // Lord of hosts, send legions of angels to the major media centers of the world, such as Hollywood and New York, to assist in spreading Your message and accomplishing Your will. Granted, it doesn't have the lyricism of the 23rd Psalm, but thanks to the ministry of Mastermedia International Inc., which mails out free "Redemptive Prayers for Hollywood" flyers to 50,000 evangelical Christian subscribers, people can pray those words and perhaps move showbiz types to use their considerable influence only for good. The group also offers a Media Leader Prayer Calendar-available online too-so believers can focus their prayers simultaneously on alphabetically designated targets. On April 7, it's Independence Day director Roland Emmerich. The next day, Eminem. On the 9th, it's the entire cast and crew of Entertainment Tonight. The calendar reveals what many conservative Christians feel about Hollywood-that it ignores their values. Despite high ratings for Joan of Arcadia on TV, numerous shout-outs to God on awards up about their religious beliefs, many Americans still feel alienated by the Hollywood studios' menu of coarse language, rampant sex, gay characters and certain Super Bowl halftime shows. "Hollywood, at heart, is anti-Christian-the only time you see churches are during funerals and weddings," declares Robert Knight, director of the D.C.-based Culture and Family Institute, who opposes programs like Will &; Grace for "promoting a libertine lifestyle." Don't expect the highly rated show suddenly to be replaced by a prime-time edition of The 700 Club. Still, if s not as if Hollywood execs haven't noticed the power of religious-themed projects, thanks to the monumental success of Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ, which has earned an astounding $300 million at the box office so far, defying all expectations. Nearly 45 percent of Americans have either seen the film or say they intend to, according to a March Gallup poll-evidence that the film's appeal extends far beyond evangelical Christians. Producer Frank Desiderio, who principle in effect when ABC finally aired his long-shelved Judas TV movie last month. Though it fared poorly in the ratings, he says his calls are returned just a little quicker now. He didn't like The Passion for its violence but admits that the film "has raised the profile of my company. We've always said there are good stories out there. But it has been hard to make them." Perhaps, but God has long had a high profile in Hollywood. The first version of The Ten Commandments was released in 1923, and stars from Gregory Peck to Jessica Simpson have spoken openly about their faith. Even before the success of The Passion, a crop of new projects with religious themes was in the works. Director Ron Howard is bringing the controversial novel The Da Vinci Code (which suggests that Mary Magdelene bore Jesus' child) to the big screen. Gladiator director Ridley Scott's epic Kingdom of Heaven, about the Crusades, is scheduled for next year. Disney plans the Wardrobe, the Christian parable for kids by C. S. Lewis. Unlike The Passion, though, few big-studio projects deal directly with questions of belief and faith. For years Christian-themed entertainment has been treated as a niche market (see box, page 104), and conservative Christians are easy comic foils. (See Ned Flanders, the "hi-diddily-ho" holier-than-thou neighbor on The Simpsons, for one.) "We've been screaming for years that Christian folks are a large market looking for a good movie to take their families to see," says Hank Erwin, an Alabama state senator and Christian broadcaster. "They like movies like anybody else but don't like to be insulted." Those in showbiz, not surprisingly, largely disagree with the notion that they're spiritually bankrupt. "Hollywood isn't a godless place, but the people who run the major entertainment companies are a pretty homogenous group and don't understand where the rest of the country is," says producer Gavin Polone (miniseries based on the Book of Revelation will air on NBC in the fall. Roma Downey, who starred in the 1994-2003 CBS show Touched by an Angel recalls that before her series hit the airwaves "the idea of God and entertainment was decidedly unhip, even within the hallways of my own network. Somehow, it's like God equals "unfashionable." And Hollywood is all about how it looks." Since The Passion hit theaters, however, God is looking pretty good to the studios. "The primary religion practiced in Hollywood is money," says one exec. "We do not hesitate to worship false idols. If religion sells, we're going to do it." Gibson himself has hinted that he will next tell the story of Judah Maccabee, a Jewish warrior ca. 168 BC whose victory is commemorated during Hanukkah. Even Survivor creator Mark Burnett is onboard with Daughter of God, his first feature film, adapted from a novel about a female messiah. "Yes, more, producer of The Celestine Prophecy, based on the New Age bestseller." But unless these films are authentic, they will be unsuccessful. Can there be anything emptier than the word of God in the voice of the unbeliever? "As it happens, there are plenty of believers in Hollywood. You can find Denzel Washington and Angela Bassett at a Pentecostal church in South L.A; Martin Sheen at the Roman Catholic Our Lady of Malibu; Steven Spielberg was seen at Temple Emanuel in Beverly Hills, hugging Gwyneth Paltrow following his daughter's bat mitzvah. (His mom's kosher restaurant, the Milky Way, is located in the heavily Jewish Pico-Robertson neighborhood.) There are also many more who don't go to church, but that is true elsewhere. More than 80 percent of Americans might call themselves Christian but, according to a recent survey, only 43 percent regularly attend church. MTV star Jessica Simpson can relate. "I travel 300 days of the year," she says, "that is my church." The entertainment industry-like most other workplaces-also believes in the separation of church and office. Hollywood has an unwritten rule, says Kirk Cameron: "It's 'We don't care what you believe, just keep it to yourself.'" Cameron, 33, once an atheist who played mischievous son Mike on Growing Pains, is now born again and starring in the Left Behind movies (which have earned an estimated $100 million), based on the megaselling Book of Revelation thrillers. Paula Cale, who costarred on Providence, says that although she is politically and socially liberal, her Mormonism makes her a black sheep in Hollywood. "People read that I am Mormon and think that I hate gay people. I am terrified to be judged in this city because of it." Balancing faith and fame can also mean some tough choices. Cameron claims he has had to turn down no fewer than 100 jobs due to conflicts with his religious beliefs. Nonetheless, he person is true to themselves and not change beliefs like a chameleon depending on who they are talking to. "When the Jewish New Year fell on what was to be his first day on The West Wing, actor Joshua Malina says, "I was terrified to ask for the day off, but I couldn't possibly work on Rosh Hashanah." Malina, a conservative Jew, put the question to his new bosses and, he reports, "they were very nice about it." According to her father, Robert Thurman, a Buddhist scholar, Uma Thurman has said no to several films that, he says, "condone horror." (She gives a pass to pal Quentin Tarantino, whose use of screen violence, says her dad, is "like a dance.") The Passion's staunch Catholic star Jim Caviezel has twice asked that his onscreen love scenes (in Angel Eyes and High Crimes) be made more modest. Born-again Stephen Baldwin says he will do bedroom scenes there is a redemptive story line and adds, "You will not see me in a sequel to The Usual Suspects anytime soon." Before Everybody Loves Raymond made her a star, Patricia Heaton (raised Catholic, now a practicing Presbyterian) was sent a film script that she felt was exploitative. Though broke, she never auditioned. Fortunately, Heaton, who says grace before meals and takes her four sons to church weekly, found a home on Raymond-one of the few shows to depict church-going as a matter of course. "Most people have some kind of faith," she says. "It makes the show more real." Keeping the faith in Hollywood, though, poses special challenges. "This business tests you constantly: the materialism, the pride, the ambition," says Heaton. "The apostle Paul says, "I have died to myself and it's no longer I who live, but Christ lives in me." We're supposed to" die to ourselves month to make sure everybody knows who I am?" Madonna has always publicized her spiritual growth-from Catholicism to embracing Hinduism through yoga, and now the Jewish mysticism of Kabbalah. Demi Moore and Britney Spears are also sporting the red-string Kabbalah bracelet, meant to ward off evil (see box, page 96). And Tom Cruise praises the virtues of Scientology in an attempt to demystify the controversial religion-which he shares with John Travolta, Kirstie Alley and other stars-to his fans. "I've always found it ironic that Hollywood is seen as the godless place full of debauchery," says Barbara Hall, a Methodist and the creator of the God-is-one-of-us hit Joan of Arcadia. "Everyone I know has four children and is in bed by 9 o'clock." Still, the type of conservative Christians so thirsty for a film like The Passion are underrepresented among the Hollywood elite; it may surprise evangelicals who decried director Kevin Smith's 1999 comedy Dogma as blasphemous (it featured an abortionist who was a direct descendant of the Catholic director's films, God gets the top spot. "It ps the wife off a bit," says Smith. "But God always gets thanked first." Heaton says she understands the disconnect many feel when they go to the movies." People look at the stuff that comes out of Hollywood and think, "Who are the people making this garbage? They couldn't possibly have any connection to God." Yet even her show doesn't meet the demands of some frustrated viewers. Darrell Bock, a Dallas Theological Seminary professor, likes Everybody Loves Raymond but calls the show's depiction of the absurdly narrow-minded Protestant in-laws "typical of the stereotyping that goes on." Says Mac Brunson, the senior pastor at the First Baptist Church of Dallas: "It's okay to be tolerant of everything but an evangelical Christian. In Hollywood, when it comes to the church, they go for the bizarre and psychotic. In Runaway Jury, there was a Baptist preacher abortion. I don't know anyone that's happened to." He has hope that in the post-Passion era, Hollywood will respect the audience that has blessed Gibson with epic riches. Brunson says he doesn't need more biblical sagas, just something he can watch with the family. In fact, he's looking forward to the May romantic comedy Raising Helen, in which Kate Hudson plays a woman dating a pastor. "I'm curious to see that," he says. "Preachers can fall in love and act human. One time, I'd love to see them capture that and get it right." Memo to Dr. Brunson-the day to collectively pray for Kate Hudson is May 30. Sidebar All About Kabbalah A once-obscure form of Jewish mysticism gets a trendy-and controversial-makeover It's Friday night at LA.' s Kabbalah Centre, a former church on the fringes of Beverly Hills. On one side of the aisle Demi Moore, Torque starlet Monet Mazur, disco divaTaylor Dayne and dozens of other other side Ashton Kutcher blends into a throng of men dressed in pristine white, clapping and stomping along. As Rabbi Philip Berg, the Centre's founder, chants blessings, the crowd responds with deafening "Amens." Lately, Hollywood's sceniest spot may be here, the international headquarters of a spiritual empire based on medieval Jewish mysticism. Madonna drops by when she's not in London, where she reportedly endowed a $6 million complex for the local branch. Britney Spears, Courtney Love and even Paris Hilton have turned up, sporting red string bracelets (consecrated at the tomb of biblical matriarch Rachel) said to ward off envious glances that can cause misfortune. Why are stars flocking to esoteric studies once reserved for Jewish males over 40? A major factor is the Centre's nondenominational emphasis on personal growth, which provokes ire from religious purists but inspires awe among devotees. "It's helped me get out of 'it's all about me,'" says Mazur. "It's With his new spin on Kabbalah, Berg, 74, has built a nonprofit giant that boasts more than 200,000 followers, 50 facilities worldwide and annual revenues of at least $5.5 million. (While services are free, 10-week classes cost up to $270; Centres also sell private-label jewelry, water, books and videos.) Kabbalah dates back to the 13th century, when Spanish mystic Moses de Leon published the Zohar ("Book of Splendor"). His revelation: The Torah-the first five books of the Bible-is written in code; its deepest meanings can be decrypted through numerology, wordplay and meditation. After a few centuries of popularity, Kabbalah was relegated to the margins of Judaism. Fast-forward to the early ' ' 60s, when Feivel Gruberger, an Orthodox rabbi turned insurance salesman from Brooklyn, N.Y., met master Kabbalist Rav Yehuda Brandwein on a business trip to Israel and became Brandwein's disciple. After Brandwein died in 1969, Gruberger-who changed his name to Philip Berg-set out to realize Brandwein's vision Karen, 61, he opened the first Kabbalah Centre in Tel Aviv in the 1970s. Interest exploded in the late ' ' 90s thanks to the Internet and Berg's move to LA., which brought the Centre into Hollywood's orbit. Touting its version of Kabbalah as a "spiritual technology," the Centre welcomes worshippers of all faiths. Says Berg's son and designated successorYehuda, 31: "You try to package the thing to fit the generation." Many scholars call the Centre's tenets-that the key to happiness is sharing with others and controlling negative emotions; that good and bad luck result largely from our own behavior, in this or a past life-oversimplifications of traditional teachings. The Centre offers "an amalgam of Kabbalah, New Age and self-help," says former Berkeley religion professor Daniel Matt, author of a newly published translation of the Zohar's first two volumes. Other criticisms are more disturbing. Groups ranging from Jews for Judaism to the anticult Freedom of Mind Center report cases in which their unbelieving spouses or make donations beyond their means. One ex-follower, Juliana, 25 (who asked that her last name not be used), says she quit college to become a chevra, or volunteer staffer, at the L.A. Centre. For food, a shared room and a stipend of $35 a month, she says, she often worked from 9 a.m. to 1 a.m. When her father fell ill with heart disease, Juliana says her teachers told her to work harder and pray instead of visiting him. She was ostracized, she maintains, when she insisted on going anyway. Yehuda Berg denies that the Centre controls its followers or demands contributions, noting that every house of worship has its own way of raising funds: "Is there one synagogue that doesn't have a gift shop?" His high-profile acolytes agree. "If it doesn't work for you, that doesn't mean it doesn't work for others," says Roseanne Barr. "What I like about Kabbalah is ego inflates. I think it's really good that people are talking about this subject in this particular town." -Kenneth Miller in Los Angeles Here comes Brother Washington," security guards murmur when longtime congregant Denzel Washington arrives for services at West Angeles Church of God in Christ, a Pentecostal church that is a hub for African-American A-listers. Along with wife Pauletta, Washington-whose dad was a Pentecostal minister-will either sit in the front row or blend in on the balcony. "It's not a big deal, because the parishioners all know him" says his publicist Alan Nierob, who adds that the actor donates "in a quiet way" to the church, headed by much loved Bishop Charles E. Blake. Occasionally, the star gets handed a script. Says Blake's son, the church's community relations director; "We have to remind people, 'This man has a soul too.'" Sidebar NICK LACHEY &; JESSICA SIMPSON "My faith is every single inch who I am," (her dad is a Baptist minister) and famously stayed a virgin until marriage. Though she and husband Lachey attend Bel Air Presbyterian, she travels so often that "my church lately has really been within myself and my relationship with God." Sidebar UMA THURMAN The Dalai Lama "is like our family rabbi," says Robert Thurman, a Buddhist scholar and father of the star. When she and her three brothers were young, "our way of practicing was to try to be kind to each other." These days, he says, his kids "are not card-carrying" Buddhists. His pal Richard Gere is. And, Thurman says jokingly, "me and Goldie Hawn want to make a Buddha movie." PATRICIA HEATON Raised Catholic, the Everybody Loves Raymond actress became a Presbyterian as an adult. The Passion "jump-started my prayer life," she says. But few of her industry pals have seen it. "And they see everything. I think Jesus is a scary. But confronted with Jesus you have to say, "I believe that or I don't." It's very powerful." KIRK SPEAKS OUT When asked to do an interview about Hollywood and religion, actor Kirk Douglas, who is Jewish, wrote a heartfelt letter recalling the anti-Semitism he endured as a child and his response to Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ Despite charges of anti-Semitism against the film, some religious leaders say it has generated a renewed dialogue between Christians and Jews. But Douglas, 87, was disturbed by the seemingly benign portrayal of Roman governor Pontius Pilate, while the Jewish crowd calls for Jesus' crucifixion. Excerpts from his letter: When I was about 7 years old, I came crying home to my mother with a bloody nose. My mother was appalled. "What happened?" "Yanak hit me! He said I killed Jesus!" "You killed what?" "I didn't kill him. I don't even know who he grew bigger. They used women's stockings filled with pebbles to hit me, yelling, "You killed Jesus Christ!"... I sat intently watching The Passion, and I was suddenly shocked to see Pontius Pilate play a scene as if he were Hamlet. He was very troubled and concerned about accusations against this man called Jesus Christ. He declared him innocent. The crowd outside roared with disapproval of his decision. Pontius reconsidered. Pontius reacted. He let the crowd make the decision. He asked them to choose between a thief, Barabbas, and Jesus. The crowd roars, "Crucify Jesus!" Then the violence begins. Unbearable, distasteful, sadomasochistic; it was almost like a porno film with a naked man whipped until the blood flowed. It was shot from every conceivable angle. The audience reacted in many different ways. Some were appalled. Some cried. Mel, I am a Jew. You are a Catholic. I think you did a disservice to both the Jews and Christians have comfortable dialogue. At the present time, the Catholic Church has many problems to deal with. They don't want another. Now, was it worth the money? MARTIN SHEEN Once a lapsed Catholic, Sheen (who worships near his Malibu home) rediscovered the faith in'' 81 after the success of Apocalypse Now. "I came back to the church of Mother Teresa," the frequent activist told Reader's Digest, "and began to get involved in socialJustice issues." Sidebar JENNIFER LOPEZ Brought up Catholic by her Puerto Rican-born parents in The Bronx, Lopez still holds the religion close. Ben Affleck (who is a nonpracticing Episcopalian) has said she insisted that her children be raised in the church. When the couple split up, Lopez turned to Merle Gonzales, a Cuban-born Santeria priestess in East L.A. Common among Caribbean immigrants, Santeria combines Catholic iconography with West African traditions. Sidebar WHAT IS SCIENTOLOGY? Lisa Marie Presley has called it "the most incredible Cruise credits it with helping" me to be able to live the kind of life that I'm living. "The U.S. government grants it the tax-exempt status of a religion. So just what is the Church of Scientology? Founded in the 1950s by science fiction writer L. Ron Hubbard, Scientology holds that" man is a spiritual being... able to accomplish his goals and gain lasting happiness. "Scientologists begin their journey during an "auditing" session. They are wired to an "e-meter," similar to a lie detector, which monitors reaction to pahiful memories. And by discussing those experiences, the member aims to erase the damage of the past. Advocates of the church praise its literacy and drug recovery programs, though its reputation suffers because former members have called it a mind-controlling cult. "Give us a break," said John Travolta. "Being the bold personalities we are, do you honestly think we'd let ourselves be controlled?" Sidebar ARNOLD &; MARIA Governor the folk-music mass at St. Monica Catholic church in Santa Monica. After the'' 94 earthquake, they helped restore the Spanish-style building. Also seen: Brooke Shields. HOLY-WOOD: AN ALTERNATIVE When I first got saved," says Stephen Baldwin, who was born again in 2002, "I was looking for all the gnarly Christian rock music and cool DVDs. Sadly, that wasn't out there." So Baldwin started making his own documentary, Livin' It, about evangelical extreme sports figures, joining a booming alternative to Hollywood. Been missing former Eight Is Enough star Willie Aames? He spent eight years in blue tights as religious superhero Bibleman. VeggieTales, a series of New Testament stories told through animated produce, has grossed more than $25 million on the big screen and DVD. Even Christian video games are a $100 million-a-year business. The biggest prePassion Christian blockbusters of all are authors Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins's 60-million-selling Left Behind thrillers, whose final installment comes out this spring. LaHaye a new four-book series. He and Jenkins run a contest patterned after Project Greenlight to aid upcoming Christian writers. "The Bible is full of great stuff," says LaHaye's agent Joel Gotler. "And it's all free. It's in the public domain." Adds LaHaye: "The more people who hear the word of God, the better." Author Affiliation Written by Allison Adato. Reported by Tom Cunneff, Ruth Andrew Ellenson, Maureen Harrington, Oliver Jones, Vicki Sheff-Cahan, Lyndon Stambler and Frank Swertlow in Los Angeles, Mark Dagostino and Rebecca Paley in New York City, Susan Mandel and Macon Morehouse in Washington, D.C., Nancy Wilstach in Birmingham, Ala., and Darla Atlas in Dallas //
Section: Advisor Sick of being told that everything is bad for you? Here's an eater's digest of what you should (and should not) swallow
We're all targets of advice. We get it from friends, relatives and that annoying guy on the bus. Usually we get it without asking, and sometimes, on rare occasions, we take it to heart. And it helps.
But there's a fine line between positive advice and incessant nagging. Consider, for example, the information you've been hearing lately about the dangers of dining out. Every week you're told how unhealthy it is to eat this or to eat that. You see it on the news. You read it in the paper. And it's beginning to wear on you. Even your barber, in between snips, is giving you a detailed lecture on nutrition. Something he read in USA Today said Chinese takeout was bad for you. And Italian food. And Mexican. And deli sandwiches. And popcorn. It's enough to taste good and won't kill you.
We could blame the press for all this alarming stuff. After all, they're the folks who churn out the bad tidings. But it might help to first ask where they get their information. One of their primary sources is a nonprofit consumer health group called the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI). Once an obscure group existing on subscriptions to its Nutrition Action Health Letter and cash grants from private foundations, the CSPI has now carved out a highly visible niche lambasting restaurant takeout foods, as well as baby food, frozen food and dell sandwiches. Its targets have included fettuccine Alfredo, which it calls "a heart attack on a plate; Kung Pao chicken (nearly as fatty as four Quarter Pounders, the CSPI says) and Chilies Rellenos, which the CSPI claims has as much saturated fat as 27 slices of bacon. There are plenty more, but you get the idea.
And CSPI director Michael Jacobson, Ph.D., posing for cameras while taking a chisel to a 50-pound block of fat or dressing as Tony the Tiger to condemn sugary breakfast cereals. These theatrics have helped the CSPI make the front pages -- and triple its annual revenues over the past 10 years to more than 12 million dollars.
To its credit, the CSPI does publish positive, practical health advice in its newsletter. But you rarely ever hear about that. Instead, the hacks on your local nightly news would rather report on the latest health hazard lurking in your fridge or at the local takeout. And now that the CSPI has become the clearinghouse for nutritional grenades, the press has come to expect it, and the CSPI is content to serve it up like morning mush.
The question is this: Should you be taking any of this alarming health information seriously? Especially if some of it is coming from a guy in a tiger costume?
We talked to many health experts and found that they too are beginning to wonder Telling the public everything is bad, without any positive advice, makes them more inclined to give up and resort to unhealthful eating," says Judith S. Stern, Sc.D., R.D., professor of nutrition and internal medicine at the University of California at Davis. Even the CSPI's own research suggests its scare tactics maybe less than effective. In one survey, it found that of those who'd heard of the CSPI's work, most agreed the center is performing a valuable service. But less than half actually heeded the advice when dining out.
That may be due to the fact that most of us respond better to positive than to negative reinforcement. We'd rather know what we can enjoy, instead of what we can't. Tell us to stop thinking about Heather Locklear, and she'll pop into our heads and stay there for a long time. The same thing goes if someone tells us to lay off the deli. All of a sudden we want pastrami.
So we of nutrition experts and asked them to cut through the alarmist hype and offer helpful suggestions about eating out. Here's what they advise.
Indulge occasionally. In the CSPI newsletter, Jacobson writes that "If we had our way, everyone would be dining on whole grains, beans, vegetables and fruit, along with low-fat dairy foods and maybe a little lean meat and poultry: To be sure, a lot of people are eating this way already. But is it so bad if you aren't?
"For most of us, it's more realistic to work certain fatty foods into a well-balanced diet, instead of tossing out every food you have a hankering for," says Wayne Callaway, M.D., former director of the Mayo Nutrition Clinic. That's because those hankerings are perfectly natural and shouldn't be ignored. Satisfy that craving and you probably won't need to do it again for a while.
"But consistent deprivation won't work; says Edith Hogan, R.D. Studies show that people on deprivation diets often end up bingeing on the very foods they try to avoid. A guilty pleasure now and then serves as a release valve to ease the cravings." "We don't just eat for health, we also eat for pleasure," says Hogan. "And you can have both. Your body needs both:
Besides, there's no such thing as a "one size fits all" diet anyway. So don't kill yourself trying to follow a strict regimen your body isn't prepared to handle. You're only human.
Try many different restaurants. When the CSPI reviews restaurant foods, its methods are accurate but often unfair. In a typical report, many samples of the same food (for instance, a Reuben sandwich) are taken from a number of different restaurants and sent to a lab, where they are blenderized and analyzed. It's all so frighteningly simplistic. Equal portions of the foods from these restaurants are lumped together-side dishes and blended into a single unrecognizable, murky glop of indiscriminate calories. It's not a meal, it's a mess. But what ends up in the CSPI report is an average figure for fat content, total calories and sodium content.
Here's the problem: While one deli may make a Reuben with plenty of whole-grain bread, lots of relish and sauerkraut and corned beef with excess fat trimmed off, the next might make one with white bread and lard. You'll never know, however, because the the CSPI comes up with one average number for all its samples, eliminating any range. The CSPI leaves out the variability regular restaurant-goers encounter all the time.
So, rather than avoid all restaurants, simply shop around. Check out all the local places that serve, say, Mexican food, and try out a new place each week. Just avoid the obvious fry pits where the restaurant counter is a window on the side of a trailer and the cashier is wearing a to weed out the greasy ones and find the healthier ones," says Dr. Callaway.
When eating out, sample and share. As you read about how unhealthy certain restaurant foods are, you'll often find that the spotlighted dishes, such as Kung Pao chicken or fettuccine Alfredo, are the most fattening on the menu. And the portions being analyzed are shockingly huge. "Most people already know how fattening these foods are; says Dr. Callaway. But face it, it's hard to finish a heaping plate of high-fat food. You might share it, you might leave it, you might even doggie-bag it. You might even shape the stuff left on the plate into a lovely design to impress the help. But you probably won't eat as much of the stuff as the CSPI is analyzing.
And believe it or not, there are plenty of leaner dishes out there in restaurant-land. The CSPI even lists them in its newsletters, but they're invariably overlooked by the press are just a few of the good ones:
* Mexican: The chicken fajitas are fine, with 26 percent of their calories coming from fat. A chicken burrito gets only 36 percent of its calories from fat. Go light on the guacamole and sour cream, and have the Mexican rice as a low-fat side. That will leave room for the frozen margaritas.
* Deli: Have the turkey breast with mustard or lean roast beef with mustard. Both are low-fat, provided you don't slather them with too much mayonnaise or chase them with a chocolate shake.
* Italian: Except for impeccably dressed Mafia bosses, who eats Alfredo anyway? Spaghetti with tomato or meat sauce, linguine with red or white clam sauce, even spaghetti with meatballs are all fine. All these dishes have less than 30 percent of their calories coming from fat.
* Chinese takeout: Try the Szechuan shrimp (18 percent of calories from fat), the stir-fried vegetables (22 percent calories from fat from fat) or chicken chow mein (28 percent calories from fat). And before you order, please refrain from stuffing your face with those deep-fried noodles staring at you from the bowl. Those are quick, painless ways to pile on the fat. And really, they don't taste that great anyway.
Worry about the bigger issues. Sure, you've heard by now that movie popcorn is high in fat. But so what if it's greasier than the theater floor? Should you waste time and energy getting all hot and buttery over it? After all, you probably only eat the stuff a few times a year. And when you do order a big tub, you rarely dig through it alone. You share it with your date. Your brother. Your kid sister. The heavy breather behind you. Or, halfway through the box, you toss it on the floor where it belongs or fling it at the screen during particularly maudlin scenes. "To my knowledge," says Dr. Callaway.
But here's the thing: Worrying about a fatty food you rarely eat steers emphasis away from more pressing matters. "Instead, we should focus on portion size, eating frequency and getting a variety of foods -- which are all simple behaviors to change," says Dr. Callaway. And since the major reason for obesity is decreased activity levels, he says, better to emphasize the importance of getting a daily jog rather than switching from hot buttered kernels to chocolate raisins at the cinema.
Organizations like the CSPI may have the best intentions at heart. "But rather than warn against foods we rarely eat, we should stress the good foods we can enjoy," says Mary Ellen Camire, Ph.D., associate professor in the department of food science and human nutrition at the University of Maine.
Jacobson, though, sees value in the CSPI's approach. "Hopefully these so-called scares generate changes that will make it possible for people not to worry about worrying. Or they might simply stop listening. After all, who hasn't heard the story about the boy who cried wolf?
PHOTO (COLOR): THE HORROR, THE HORROR: Movie popcorn may be loaded with fat, but how often do you really eat it?
By GREG GUTFELD
Section: NUTRITION You Know what your diet needs right now? Hint: It's on this list
WHAT IN THE WORLD IS WRONG WITH YOU?
What's missing from your life? You've got your karma and you've got your chi. But you're still feeling so lousy that you joined Oprah's book club.
Maybe it's time to try looking for your missing nutrient -- copper, folio acid, iron, magnesium, phosphorus, omega-3 fatty acids, or zinc. If one of these is absent from your diet -- and chances are one is -- you'll get sick, you'll get sore, and you'll get stupid.
Once you know what's missing, where are you going to look? Forget journaling and meditating. Try shopping. Here's your list. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Runny nose, coughing, fever WHAT MAY BE MISSING: COPPER
Who says it isn't a precious metal? When University of North Carolina at Greensboro researchers infected human cells with bacteria, they found that the cells bacteria than did cells with low copper levels. They also produced up to 60 percent more cytokines -- chemicals that trigger the body's immune response. "The fact that these were otherwise healthy cells shows just how sensitive our immune system is to a lack of copper," notes Mark Failla, Ph.D., the study author.
WHERE TO FIND IT: In your breakfast. One bowl of raisin bran, a slice of buttered whole wheat toast, and a cup of hot chocolate will give you more than a third of what you need each day. Copper has also been spotted in lobster, cashews, and salmon. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Huffing and puffing, even without a cigarette; lack of stamina during aerobic exercise WHAT MAY BE MISSING: ZINC
Zinc is the fitness mineral for men. A USDA study recently found that men on a low-zinc diet had a 40 percent decrease in red-blood-cell activity. "The longer it takes red blood cells to transfer carbon dioxide to your lungs, the harder Ph.D., the study author. Plus, without enough zinc, your body can't clear the lactic acid out of your muscles, and that makes them heavy, very heavy. In fact, simply trying to get out of your own way will send your heart racing and make your breathing labored.
WHERE TO FIND IT: In a lean hamburger on a whole wheat bun; it has three times the zinc of that chicken sandwich you think is a healthier choice. You'll also find zinc in baked beans, peanut butter-and-jelly sandwiches, and scrambled eggs. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Headaches, sleepless nights WHAT MAY BE MISSING: MAGNESIUM
Think of magnesium as your body's bouncer; without enough of it, uninvited calcium will rush into your cells and wreak havoc on key hormones and neurotransmitters. After a little while, blood vessels become constricted and your head starts hurting, says Burton M. Altura, Ph.D., professor of physiology and pharmacology at the State University of New York at Brooklyn. "Too making it difficult for you to fall asleep."
WHERE TO FIND IT: In a baked potato topped with broccoli and a slice of melted cheese, plus a glass of milk. Magnesium is also found in almonds, frozen fish fillets, bananas, and whole grain breads and cereals. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Brittle bones, frequent stress fractures, teeth that crack when opening beer bottles WHAT MAY BE MISSING: PHOSPHOROUS
You'd think that guzzling calcium-fortified orange juice would buy you a set of unbreakable bones. We used to think that, too. But it turns out that adding extra calcium to your diet without an equal amount of phosphorus will actually increase the odds that sticks, stones, and just about anything else will break your bones. "Extra calcium can make the composition of the bones unbalanced," says Joseph Spence, Ph.D., director of the USDA's Human Nutrition Research Center. "Your body will continue to build bone, but without enough phosphorus, the composition will be fragile Canadian-bacon-and-egg sandwich on a whole wheat English muffin. This modified McMuffin has 348 milligrams of phosphorus, exactly what you need to balance the 350 milligrams of calcium in a glass of fortified orange juice. You can also find phosphorus in pizza, macaroni and cheese, and chicken vegetable soup. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Constantly sore muscles, aching joints, difficulty picking up gym bag without a spotter WHAT MAY BE MISSING: OMEGA-3 FATTY ACIDS
If you've stopped trying to show off by bench-pressing the stairclimber and you still feel sore all the time, you may need more omega-3s in your diet. Researchers from down under recently found that men who ate the most omega-3 fatty acids had 26 percent lower levels of prostaglandins -- fatty acids that cause muscle soreness. Taking in more omega-3s can counterbalance prostaglandin production and may decrease recovery time and diminish muscle pain, says William Lands, Ph.D., a senior science advisor at the National Institutes of Health.
WHERE TO FIND IT: In pizza with anchovies. A shrimp cocktail on whole wheat bread is also high in omega-3s. YOUR SYMPTOMS: You're getting dumber, you can't concentrate, and you laugh at your own stupid jokes. WHAT MAY BE MISSING: IRON
That's right, iron, a.k.a. kryptonite to men. Studies have linked high levels of iron, in excess of 10 milligrams a day, to an increased risk of heart disease in men. But if you're too good about watching your iron intake and you're on a low-fat diet that's light on meat, you could be coming up short. Without enough iron, your body has trouble ferrying oxygen through your bloodstream and dropping it off where you need it most: your brain. "When oxygen isn't reaching the brain, you feel light-headed and tired. Cognitive performance can suffer, too," says Gary Miller, Ph.D., a professor of health at Wake Forest University.
WHERE TO FIND IT: In a Caesar salad. Just make sure it's a big bowl lemon juice. Eating foods high in vitamin C, like lemons, along with an iron-rich meal improves your body's absorption of the mineral, says Miller. Iron also turns up in lean beef, dried fruit, and raisin bran. YOUR SYMPTOMS: Forgetfulness. For example, you forgot you read this already. This, too. WHAT MAY BE MISSING: FOLIC ACID
... and your keys. Sure, there are a lot of reasons your memory could be going, but why not eliminate the easiest one first? (Okay, the second easiest if you're Woody Harrelson.) According to a recent Swedish study, those people who bombed on a series of memory tests also had the lowest blood levels of folic acid. Researchers speculate that a shortage of folic acid may cause a spike in levels of homocysteine, an amino acid that damages blood vessels in the heart and the brain.
WHERE TO FIND IT: In a bowl of three-bean chili. One serving contains more than half also present in orange juice, corn on the cob, and guacamole. SO WHY DO N'T I JUST TAKE A MULTIVITAMIN?
We thought you'd ask that. Sure, taking a multivitamin is an option; it's just not the best option. Not every multi has these nutrients or has them in adequate or safe amounts. You're also missing out on a ton of phytochemicals, plant compounds that have health benefits like helping to prevent cancer and lowering your risk of heart disease.
Downing a handful of individual supplements is no answer, either. "Separating nutrients into individual supplements such that they can't interact with other nutrients isn't as effective as eating food," says Gary Miller, Ph.D., a professor of health at Wake Forest University. Besides, food tastes better.
By Katrin McDonald
As a registered nurse and mother, Terri Swearingen, 40, knows a little something about persistence. For the last two decades, she has been making thousands of calls and speeches, conducting health surveys, appealing to Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) officials, pleading with the President, and making trouble for Waste Technologies Industries (WTI). Swearingen's goal is nothing less than shutting down one of the largest toxic waste incinerators in the world, which was built in her hometown of East Liverpool, Ohio. (She now lives just a few miles away in Chester, West Virginia with her husband and teenage daughter.) Swearingen's tireless work made her a winner of this year's prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize. She points out, again and again, that the toxic waste incinerator is just 1,100 feet from an elementary school. WTI's facility, now operational, is expected to burn more than 350 million pounds of hazardous wastes per year in two kilns, with the emissions reaching as far as Pittsburgh. First proposed in 1979, the facility a lowincome neighborhood in 1992. The threat of the incinerator led Swearingen to co-found the Tri-State Environmental Council-a grassroots coalition of citizens from West Virginia, Ohio and Pennsylvania whose mission is to stop environmental racism. In 1991, Swearingen led 1,000 residents in their first protest march; since then, she has been arrested over a dozen times for acts of civil disobedience against hazardous waste incinerators. In 1993, when WTI's plant began limited operation, Swearingen quickly increased her activities to get the word out-gaining national attention by being arrested in front of the White House. (The following day, the Clinton administration announced major revisions in EPA policy concerning hazardous waste incinerators.) She was later instrumental in convincing Ohio's governor to place a moratorium on new incinerators in the state, and the EPA to place an 18-month moratorium on newly-built incinerators. Swearingen blames a lax government and environmental racism for East Liverpool's struggles. E: You've been arrested over a dozen times. What did your civil disobedience accomplish? Photograph feet from an elementary school-has become Terri Swearingen s never-ending mission. // SWEARINGEN: In 1983, the East Liverpool incinerator became a national issue. That's when I did the Greenpeace bus tour. We were in 25 cities in 18 states in a month. The Greenpeace bus was fueled by soy diesel, and this ecologicallysound bus tour culminated in Washington, D.C. We parked the big yellow vehicle-affectionately known as "Big Bird" right in front of the White House and refused to move. We chained ourselves to the vehicle and to cement blocks, and it took six hours to jackhammer us out. The very next day, a New York Times article said that the EPA would overhaul its regulations, set new dioxin standards and create more stringent heavy metal standards. When Clinton and Gore finally came to Ohio, they said the site was a ludicrous place to put an incinerator. It's 320 feet from the nearest house, and 1,100 feet from an elementary school of 400 kids. It's also in days. Air inversions recently killed about 20 people in Pennsylvania by trapping air pollution over a community. As far as the kids in the elementary school, and the kids in the community go-they are poor, and have families that are uneducated and just trying to keep food on the table. But this isn't just about children? No. Eastern Liverpool has about 13,000 people. 500 of them are African-Americans, and all 500 live in the vicinity of the incinerator. It's also an impoverished neighborhood that's part of Appalachia. It's a fairly rural area-far from the capital and elected officials. When I first jumped into this, I was at ground zero. So I picked up Rush to Burn: America's Energy Crisis. I read the book twice and highlighted sections with the people involved. Then I just started calling them up and asking for help. They said, "You're going to have to deal with this yourself." I have a family, and people forget that. What's going on in East Liverpool now? Our community's health is being affected. I'm also being sued for libel. WTI put SLAPP Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation suit against me. I think that WTI is the epitome of everything that's wrong with the regula tory system and our government. The WTI SLAPP suit is camouflage to divert attention away from the issue. Instead, they attack your position and your First Amendment rights-and your children's security. They can come into my community and say, "We're going to build this because the EPA gave us permission to, and if you try and stop us, we'll sue you." Everyone who's seen this facility-even top public health experts-say it's the worst place for an incinerator, parallel to designing transport for Death Valley around ice skates. Even the EPA's regional director, Valdas Adamkus, who permitted this incinerator, admitted that WTI should never have built it where it is. So the biggest problem is the? It was a study conducted by Cerrell and Associates in 1986 outlining where companies could locate toxic or controversial facilities with the least opposition. It concluded that they should locate in poorer, uneducated or Catholic communities. Why Catholic? Because Catholics don't usually question authority. East Liverpool is that kind of community. I think WTI tried to figure out exactly where the least opposition would be. Since the incinerator started, have you been keeping tabs on health records in the area? Have there been significant increases in incidents of cancer or abnormal cancers, or anything else unusual? In East Liverpool, the breast cancer rate per 100,000 between 1992 and 1995 was 41.5. The Ohio rate for the same period of time was 28.2. The U.S. average was 26.2. You can see how much higher East Liverpool is. Now there is also a cancer cluster in the east end near the site. There were two surgeries for male breast cancer in East Liverpool recently. And they went unreported. I spoke with a lady who lives 800 feet behind the incinerator. She called me about a year ago and said her 13-year-old daughter had already lost 50 pounds and was feeling weak and tired all of the time. She had a menstrual cycle that would last forever-she was bleeding continuously. She was seeing different doctors, and no one could tell her what was wrong. They even tested her for AIDS because they knew it was a problem with her immune system. The mother called me, and her question was: Was this because of WTI? And didn't know how to answer her-because it could have been. It had been operating at that time for three years, and her daughter was in a sensitive period of development-puberty. And it was her immune system and her reproductive system she was having problems with. On May 8, the mother told the EPA, "Three years ago, I had three healthy children," and then proceeded to talk about all their health problems now. Her oldest daughter was. She also relayed the story of her now-14-year-old daughter in continuous pain. Do you use the national Toxics Release Inventory database in your fight against WTI? No, it doesn't apply to incinerators. Remember your basic physics lesson-that matter can neither be created nor destroyed. WTI is saying it's taking toxic waste from other facilities and destroying it. Whenever they do burn waste, it's not really destroyed-it's reduced to ash in a more concentrated form. All this dangerous dioxin is coming out of the stack. So the government says, "You have to reduce your dioxin emissions." How do they do that? By putting pollution control devices on the machinery. But the dioxin has to go somewhere, so it ends up in the ash. So you're not really reducing the pollution, you're shifting it to another place. People have to understand that. In a lot of cases, it has changed to something more toxic than what was put into the incinerator to be destroyed ash, where roughly 50 percent of what's brought in has to be hauled off site and deposited in a toxic waste landfill. It's got all of these heavy metals, including everything all those devices pulled out of the air. Is that the primary danger? The EPA itself said, "What we consider to be a serious risk at this time are accidents" -you know, fires and explosions at the site-because the homes and the school are so very close. There have been a couple of valve failures, and the school wasn't even notified. And that's pretty scary. What else is happening there that they are not telling people about? It becomes a matter of trust. The facility is operating now. Can we trust these people to do their job properly and be up front with the public so we can develop a level of trust? We do not have that. What advice do you have for people who have a similar situation developing in their neighborhood? Where should One, to get information about emissions -exactly what is coming out of that stack. Another group of people could be doing a community health survey. That's what Citizen's Clearinghouse on Hazardous Wastes founder Lois Gibbs did a few years ago at Love Canal. She just started going around to her neighbors and saying, "Look, talk to me about your health problems. What's going on in your life? What about your kids?" Keep a record of who you talk to, the date, and what they told you. Is there a pattern? Then, compare it to what's coming out of the stack. You know that for lead, you're going to have problems with learning disabilities. So look at what symptoms are related to lead exposure and what people are telling you. Also, define your goal. Do you want the facility to be stopped, or just restricted? Start talking to people, and find out what others think. Go to them, and're interested, so you can form an organized group. Then, put out a press advisory that you've started an organization to monitor the situation, and that will get the media's interest. From there, it just involves a lot of research. But, make sure your information is accurate. That's the bottom line. That is the way you establish your credibility. Finally, remember your target. In this case, our target is not the state or federal EPA, although we call them on the carpet when there are problems. Our target is WTI parent company Von Roll. That's who we want to stop. You have to be very focused. Some people go off on tangents, and end up diluting their own effectiveness. What was your initial goal when this started? The incinerator's complete shutdown. Again, I can't say this enough: It's the location, stupid. This thing should never have been built here. You don't put an inherently toxic waste in the shadow of an elementary school, and right next to homes. When WTI first came into this community back in 1980, nobody really knew what the ramifications of incineration were. It was a fairly new technology. There weren't too many operating incinerators around the country at that time.We didn't have anything to go by. People instinctively knew that this didn't sound like a very good thing. And WTI used all the tricks in the book. They came in under the guise of a waste-to-energy facility, saying that they would provide cheap energy to the local community, and jobs to an economically depressed area. And that nothing would come out of the stack except water and carbon monoxide. But people questioned it. Photograph Arrested over a dozen times, Swearingen says civil disobedience is an effective grabber of media attention for environmental fights. // Our fight is a tribute to grassroots organization. I'm proof that anybody can do it. People see that I'm ordinary, and realize things done for the environment. My message is "get involved," because the government is not always going to protect your best interests. The government is getting out of control because no one is watching. Von Roll is a multinational Swiss corporation that had some of its top executives convicted in a criminal trial for selling war materials to Iraq for Saddam Hussein's Supergun. Eight years ago, I thought that if I took information to the appropriate officials, they would stop this. I was so wrong. But one of my greatest assets was my ignorance. Once you get involved, you're going to learn the things they know along the way. You're going to learn how to fight on their level. And hopefully, win.
What's harder than building career momentum? Jumping right to the top. Josh Duhamel prepares you for liftoff
IT'S EASY TO DISCOUNT JOSH DUHAMEL. You see the tall, lean frame, the rugged mug, the superstar babe on his arm, and you think, Dude's got it so easy. But toss back a brew with the guy and you'll find that he's no Hollywood himbo -- just a regular joe with a hardworking streak as wide as the Santa Monica freeway.
Remember Duhamel back in 2004? No? Well, we're willing to bet that your wife or girlfriend probably does: As the eponymous lust object in the beefcake chick flick Win a Date with Tad Hamilton! Duhamel grinned his way into the spotlight, chopping wood sans shirt and outshining his romantic foil, Topher Grace -- the putative everyman.
But here's the thing: Somehow, after the curtain dropped on Tad Hamilton, Duhamel, 34, found a way to slough off that dimpled, one-dimensional exoskeleton and become that everyman himself, the, if just to sneak a peek at his playbook. Take his new film, the savage thriller Turistas, which opens this month. A chick flick it's not: Duhamel told us that a writer from Ells magazine walked out of a screening because it was too intense. (In our book that makes any film a must-see.) Next up? A megabudget Transformers adaptation with producer Michael Bay. And then there's that regular TV gig on the show Las Vegas in which Duhamel is the Cool Hand Luke of the crew amidst all the sex and sin.
Offscreen, he's managed to land one of the hottest and coolest women out there -- Fergie from the Black Eyed Peas -- not just for a couple of dates, but a couple of years. Basically, Duhamel has assembled what everyone is striving for: career success, a great relationship, and a skull screwed on just tight enough to keep it all together. Almost.
"Well. I'm constantly trying to. But I definitely have my moments."
Sure, Duhamel makes it look easy. But he has a few tricks up his sleeve that have stoked his success, and his life -- tricks that any regular guy can adopt. Heck, maybe you can make it look even easier. FIND YOUR FUEL
Every man needs a motivation, and Duhamel was lucky to find his early, in school. And feel free to call it what it is: spite. "There were a couple of moments in high school and college that really fueled me to come out to L.A. and prove to people that I could do it," he says. "It had to do with different coaches who didn't believe in me. I felt like I wasn't getting the respect or the shot that I deserved, especially in college. I look back on it now and it's something that I'm happy didn't work out, because it really motivated me to prove myself. It'sn't have. If that's a good reason or not, I'm not sure, but it helped me. It helps me to this day." SAY YES FIRST, ASK QUESTIONS LATER
There's inherent danger in this piece of advice. Heed it, and you could fall, and fall hard. But when a higher authority opens the door a crack, cranes his neck around the doorjamb, and asks you if you can do something you've always wanted to do, just tell him, "Damn straight I can do it," even if you have no idea. It's like that itinerant organist who ended up laying down the classic track on Dylan's "Like a Rolling Stone." You could make history. That's because taking a dangerous chance ups your game, says Duhamel. "I'd been auditioning for TV commercials and some modeling," he recalls, "and an agency in L.A. asked if I was an actor. So I said, 'have the respect I needed for it at the beginning, and after a couple of really bad auditions, I busted my ass for a couple of years just to get past the audition process. Over the past 7 years, it's become an obsession, something I really love." ALWAYS, ALWAYS LISTEN TO YOUR GODFATHER
You know you've made it in show business when you can refer to a guy like James Caan as "Jimmy." Duhamel has worked with the hard-nosed actor-he played Sonny Corleone in The Godfather -- on Las Vegas for three-plus seasons now and lists him as one of his most important friends and mentors. The consummate tough guy delivered Duhamel some advice early on that he turned into a veritable mantra. "Jimmy told me, 'No matter how successful you become, everything can not be about the work. You have to have a foundation, you have to have a strong relationship with your family and friends and the people you've known for the longest time, at some point there's going to be a downtrend, and what defines you as a man is your loved ones.'" Duhamel's not hurting for his support group: When we first spoke, he'd just returned from a sister's wedding (he has three, all younger) in his hometown in North Dakota. PICK THE RIGHT GIRL
